# JavaScript, Data Types & Variables

### **Objective: -**

In this module we'll learn about ...

- Programing and Computers
- JavaScript vs. EcmaScript
- 5 Primitive Data Types
- Discovering the `typeof` a primitive
- Data and Assigning Variables
- Using Template Literals


<br >

## A Quote On Programming

> Programming is the act of constructing a program—a set of precise instructions telling a computer what to do. Because computers are dumb, pedantic beasts, programming is fundamentally **tedious** and **frustrating**.
>
> > _Eloquent JavaScript - 3rd edition, pg. 1 (emphasis added)_

Let's unpack this quote:

- A program is "a set of _precise_ instructions **telling a computer what to do**" and writing/"contructing" these instructions is _programming_.
- "Computers are _dumb_, _pedantic_ beasts": unlike people, computers cannot "read between the lines" and fill-in implicit, contextual information. A program must have explicit and _formalized_ instructions in order to be understood by the computer.
- Because computers only understand explicit, formalized instructions, writing programs is "**tedious** and **frustrating**." Communicating with a computer will be a struggle not only to break-down seemingly simple tasks into even more basic commands, but also to find formal errors involving parentheses, brackets, braces, and other special characters not normally used in everyday communication.

<br >

---

<br >

Over the next few weeks you will be exposed to a lot of new information and concepts. Please remember to breathe and to be patient with yourself. You will probably be bad at programming for a time, just like many musicians are bad at playing their instruments for a time.

It is important to schedule regular time for yourself to practice, practice, practice. We will be giving some practice problems and HW problems, but above and beyond this, take 20 minutes per day 3x a week as a minimum to explore and review JS on your own and come back with lots of questions. Immerse yourself in JavaScript and your transition towards becoming a junior developer will be that much smoother.

<br >

## A Brief Note on How Computers Work

You may have heard the expression, "It's all 1s and 0s," with respect to computer hardware. This concept stems back to the first computers where messages were essentially communicated to a computer by toggling switches. With enough switches in a row, we can communicate quite a few messages.

An analogy for this is to think of the porch light on Halloween. If it's on, it means come trick-or-treat, and if not...well, what if we had 2 porch lights, or 4 or 8? And, what if we came to an agreement as to the meaning of the different sequences of lights? Well, that's really what it's all about.

'Back in the day,' this is how computers were programmed - on punch cards. Thankfully, today we have 'higher-level' languages so we can program using familiar characters, words and phrases that are understandable to us, and, 'under the hood', our code is compiled down by lower-level languages into a series of 1s and 0s - essentially there are a series of translators that take our 'human understandable' words and phrases and translate them into the 1s and 0s that computers know and love.

<br >

## What is JavaScript?

JavaScript was first created by Brendan Eich in the mid-90s while he worked for a browser company called Netscape. JavaScript was originally built to add dynamic content to websites (like adding the date or the number of visitors to a site's landing page). Supposedly, it was called LiveScript at first, but it was renamed to JavaScript because of a marketing decision, in an attempt to ride the coattails of Java's popularity.

<br >

> **NOTE**: There is no direct association between the Java and JavaScript - **they are wholly separate.** An analogy is: _Java is to JavaScript as Ham is to Hammock._

<br >

**J**ava**S**cript (JS) is the most applicable, powerful and flexible language in the world today - no other language in the world allows us to work natively in the browser (client side) while also on the server (NodeJS) while also creating super-fast web-based applications (**S**ingle **P**age **A**pplications - SPAs - Angular or React or Vue) while also using the same code to create native desktop applications (Electron) while also creating native mobile apps (React Native or NativeScript)!

<br >

> **NOTE**: No other programming language is 'built in' to every single web browser by default. That is the main reason why JS rules web development. This course focuses on using Vanilla (or 'plain') JS in the browser (after we learn a few programming fundamentals) to build a Single Page Application.

<br >

### EcmaScript vs. JavaScript

Ecma International is a 'governing body' of sorts that oversees standards for scripting languages (at this point, pretty much just JavaScript).

The standards for JavaScript as a language got a **major** overhaul in 2015. This came to be known as ES2015, and then later as ES6. Since that time, there have been regular annual updates to the language's specification, and these have been adopted by all of the major browsers fairly quickly. These recent updates have been known as: ES7, ES8 and then ES9.

We will **primarily** focus on writing our JavaScript using the newest features of the language, or in other words, our code will use ES2015+ _syntax_ (a fancy word meaning the keywords and 'grammar'/structure/form of the way that we write our code).

<br >

> **TIP**: Whenever you 'Google' for information regarding JavaScript, try appending 'MDN' to your search as this is a great resource for the latest/greatest information. Alternatively, you can try searching for 'ES6' instead of just 'JavaScript' to insure that the results you see are not 'outdated' and are in line with the modern approach we will be using in this course.

<br>

> **TIP**: Be wary of outdated information. W3Schools can lag behind the the latest JS updates. Check dates of posts/answers if using StackOverflow.

<br >

> ### For more in depth review of the commands, refer to [this document](Resources/TranslatingTerms.md) in your curriculum.

<br >

---

<br >

## Primitive Data Types I: String, Number, Boolean

<br >

A data type is an attribute of data which tells the compiler how the programmer intends to use some data.

[Primitives](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#Data_types) are data types that can only hold **one discrete piece of data**.

There are seven primitive data types in all, but two are beyond the scope of this course. Let's start with the three primitives we will use most:

1. _String_ - Strings are **characters contained inside single (`''`) or double (`""`) quotation marks**. JS works with the words just as they are shown.
   ```javascript
   String Examples:
   "Hello, world"
   'My name'
   "23"
   "true"
   'It was the best of times, it was the blurst of times...'
   etc.
   ```

1. _Number_ - Numbers are **any numbers _not_ contained in quotation marks**. JS does not differentiate between integers (whole numbers) and floating point numbers (decimals). Numbers can also be written in scientific notation (In scientific notation, 700 is 7 x 10^2 or 7e2)
   ```javascript
   Number examples:
   23
   8675309
   1.99
   -1000
   9e3
   etc.
   ```

1. _Boolean_ - Booleans can be one of **only two values: `true` or `false`**. Notice that booleans are not wrapped in quotation marks.
   ```javascript
   Boolean examples:
   true
   false
   ```

### The `typeof` Operator

You can check/get the type of data for any _primitive_ by using the `typeof` _operator_ like so:

```javascript
 typeof "Motorbike";
 typeof 550;
 typeof false;
```

The `typeof` operator returns the data type in a _string_ (i.e. "string", "number", "boolean")

<br >

> **TIP**: This can be handy when trying to debug your code. You can `log()` the `typeof` of some variable to make sure that the data type it references is what you expect.

<br>

### Data and Memory

To interact and give instructions to a computer, everything we do is in terms of data and memory. Data must be created and then stored in a computer's memory for future access. In fact, every single value that we create in JavaScript is stored in a generic area of memory commonly referred to as _the heap_.

<br >

---

<br >

## Variables

In programming, it's commonplace to create 'references' to these values in memory. This is the concept of '**instantiating a variable**' (`const`, `let`) and '**assigning a value to a variable**' (`=`). Whenever a _value_ in memory no longer has a _reference_ to it, the JS _garbage collector_ comes along to completely remove it from memory.

### **`const` vs. `let`**

Two keywords allow us to create a variable: `const` and `let`.
If we create a variable with `const`, the variable _cannot_ be reassigned with a new value. However, if we create a variable with `let`, the variable _can_ be mutated(changed) and/or reassigned.

```javascript
const name;
let favoriteSong;
```

> **NOTE**: You may have seen JS variables created with the keyword `var`. The keyword `var` is used in pre-ES6 JavaScript to create a variable, and we will not be using it in class.

<br >

### **Assignment Operator: `=`**

The assignment operator (`=`) is used to link variables to the values they reference. The assignment operator works right to left, for example:

```javascript
let age = 29;
```

In this example, we are creating a _value_ (`29`) on the right and a _variable_ (`age`)on the left. The _assignment operator_ takes the value on the _right_ and assigns it to the variable on the _left_.

<br >

### **Dynamic Typing**

As a language, JavaScript is **dynamically typed** (or _loosely typed_) - we don't have to explicitly declare what type of data will be stored in a variable, and we can replace data of one type with any other type of data.

<br >

---

<br >

### **JS Activity 1 (Everyone)**

> **TIP**: Until we 'connect' our JS to HTML and run things in Chrome, you can run a JS file in your terminal. Make sure you are in the directory with the file you want to run, then enter `node fileName.js` in the CLI to execute the file.

#### Practice with variables and primitive data types: [2.2.1-JSVariablesAndPrimatives.md](Activities/2.2-Activities/2.2.1-JSVariablesAndPrimatives.md)

<br >

---

<br >

### **JS Activity 2 (Students)**

> **NOTE**: When creating your variables, think about whether to use `const` or `let`. Is the data something that could change? Or is the value something that doesn't change?

#### More practice with variables and primitives: [2.2.2-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.md](Activities/2.2-Activities/2.2.2-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.md)

<br >

---

<br >

## Template Literals: Using Variables in Strings

Aside from single and double quotation marks, strings can be wrapped in backticks (``).

> **TIP**: The backtick key is located directly under the "Esc" key at the top left of your keyboard.

<br >

Wrapping your string in backticks not only allows you to use single and double quotations _inside_ your string, but also allows you to use _variables_ inside your string.

First, notice the issues that occur when using single or double quotes _within_ a string that is **not** a template literal:

```javascript
Single quotes: '"Hello," I said, "how's the weather?"';
```

```javascript
Double quotes: ""Hello," I said, "how's the weather?";
```

```javascript
Template literal: `"Hello," I said, "how's the weather?"`
```

Introduced in ES6, template literals are also an alternative to "adding" (or **concat**enating) strings and variables together. To use a variable inside a template literal, we 'wrap' the variable inside `${ }`:

```javascript
`"Hello ${name}," I said, "how's the weather?"`;
```

> When using template literals, instead of printing "name" or "\${name}", JS evaluates the variable/expression inside the braces (`{}`) and prints its value in that spot.

<br >

---

<br >

## Primitive Data Types II: Undefined & null

The last two primitive data types we will encounter often are the "empty" data types that represent the absence of data: `undefined` and `null`.

4. _null_ - If we want to indicate that a variable is "blank" **on purpose**, we _explictly_ assign the variable a value of `null`

5. _undefined_ - Undefined **should never be deliberately assigned**. Undefined is used by JS to indicate the absence of any _assigned_ value. All variables start with a value of `undefined` until they are assigned a value with the assignment operator (`=`).

<br >

> **NOTE**: When accessing a **defined variable** with _no assigned value_, you will get `undefined`. However, when accessing a **variable that has not been created**, you will get a `ReferenceError` that the variable is _not defined_.

<br >

> **NOTE**: The sixth and seventh primitive data types are `BigInt` and `Symbol`. Use of these primitives is rare, and we will not cover them in class.

<br >

---

<br >

### **JS Activity 3 (Everyone)**

#### Practice with "empty" primitives and template literals: [2.2.3-Evr-JSMorePrimitives.js](Activities/2.2-Activities/2.2.3-JSMorePrimitives.md)

<br >

---

<br >

### **JS Activity 4 (Students)**

#### More practice with primitives and template literals: [2.2.4-Stu-JSMorePrimitives.js](Activities/2.2-Activities/2.2.4-JSMorePrimitives.md)

<br >

---

<br >

### **Summary: -**

We learned ...

- That modern code is written in human-friendly languages that are compiled into 1s and 0s for computer hardware to understand.
- About "Coffee" & "Ham", and that JavaScript can be used to code the full stack in a development environment.
- that ECMA International establishes the standards for the latest version of JavaScript also called ECMA Script.
- How to discover the `typeof` of the Primitive Data Types string, number, boolean, undefined, and null
- About using the assignment operator `const` and `let`
- That JS is dynamically typed, and how to use Template Literals
