# `express`

In the last lesson, we built a RESTful API to handle the management of blog posts. While that API _works_, it doesn't work very _well_. Those rough edges include:

- parsing request bodies
- handling internal errors as proper status codes
- awkward routing and handler organization
- difficult path-parsing and validation
- difficulty handling common operations for requests and responses grouped by path and method

All of these shortcomings are problems that every user of the `http` module needs to solve. Being programmers, we know that it's probably not a good idea to reinvent the wheel once we understand why the wheel exists and how it rolls. Instead, we'd reach for a collection of tools that provide helpers and handlers that reduce our own flexibility a little bit by making reasonable decisions for us about how to handle some of those rough edges across applications. One such toolkit for writing HTTP RESTful APIs is a package called [`express`](https://expressjs.com/). You can install `express` with `npm install express`.

> `express` is very common, but it's not the only framework in town! Some other Node.js frameworks that you might see would be [`koa`](https://koajs.com/), [`hapi`](https://hapi.dev/), [`sails`](https://sailsjs.com/), or [`meteor`](https://www.meteor.com/) (among others). And if you like the way that `express` works, you can find similar frameworks in most programming languages. See [`flask`](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/) for Python, [`sinatra`](http://sinatrarb.com/) for Ruby, or [`slim`](http://www.slimframework.com/) for PHP.

## Routing

To get started, let's compare the simplest possible `http` server with the simplest possible `express` application. For review, here's the `http` version:

```javascript
const http = require('http')

const server = http.createServer(() => {})

server.listen(8675)

console.log('Listening on port 8675')
```

and here's the equivalent `express` application:

```javascript
const express = require('express')
const app = express()
app.listen(8675, () => console.log('Listening on port 8675'))
```

As you can see, they look pretty similar. The biggest diffence so far is the absence of a request listener callback in the `app` constructor function. Instead of forcing you to use a single top-level request-handler, `express` uses a [`Router` Object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#router) (included in the `app` instance through the `route()` method) to make it easier to break up your handlers by both _path_ and _method_. A single route for `/posts` in `express` would look like this:

```javascript
app
  .route('/posts')
  .get((request, response) => {
    // handle GET request for all posts
  })
  .post((request, response) => {
    // handle POST requests for new posts
  })
```

An important property of the route above: it _only_ applies to `/posts`. So `/posts/some-post-id` would _not_ match the above routes. To match routes that contain a "param" (short for "parameter") that might be different for every request, `express` has built-in parsing of named parameters from a path with the following syntax:

```javascript
app
  .route('/posts/:id')
  .get((request, response) => {
    // express adds a "params" Object to requests
    const id = request.params.id

    // handle GET request for post with an id of "id"
  })
  .patch((request, response) => {
    const id = request.params.id

    // handle PATCH request to update post "id"
  })
  .delete((request, response) => {
    const id = request.params.id

    // handle DELETE request to delete post "id"
  })
```

Let's refactor our blog post service to use `express`'s routing!

## Activity 1 (Everyone)

### Route Refactoring

0. Make sure that you're running `npm run watch:server` to keep your server process up-to-date! We'll be making a lot of changes over the next few steps

1. Make sure you've replaced your `server` with an `express` `app` like we showed above!

2. Let's break up our `HANDLERS` into separate `/posts` and `/posts/:id` routes

    - `/posts` only needs `.get` and `.post` handlers, which will look like this:

        ```javascript
        app
          .route("/posts")
          .get((_request, response) => {
            const posts = db.get("posts").value();

            ok(response, posts)
          })
          .post((request, response) => {
            let contents = "";

            request.on("data", (chunk) => (contents += chunk));

            request.on("end", () => {
                const post = db.get("posts").insert({ body: contents }).write();

                ok(response, post);
            });

            request.on("error", () => internalServerError(ersponse));
          });
        ```

    - `/posts/:id` needs `GET`, `PATCH`, and `DELETE` handlers, which will look like this:

        ```javascript
        app
          .route("/posts/:id")
          .get((request, response) => {
            // now we can get the post ID from params!
            const id = request.params.id;
            const post = db.get("posts").getById(id).value();

            if (post) {
              ok(response, post);
            } else {
              notFound(response)
            }
          })
          .patch((request, response) => {
            const id = request.params.id;
            let contents = "";

            request.on("data", (chunk) => (contents += chunk));

            request.on("end", () => {
                const post = db.get("posts").updateById(id, { body: contents }).write();

                if (post) {
                  ok(response, post);
                } else {
                  notFound(response)
                }
            });

            request.on("error", () => internalServerError(ersponse));
          })
          .delete((request, response) => {
            const id = request.params.id;
            const post = db.get("posts").removeById(id).write();

            if(post) {
              ok(response, post)
            } else {
              notFound(response)
            }
          })
        ```

      You'll notice that the `request` and `response` Objects that are used by Express are backwards-compatible with the `request` and `response` that we used with `http`, so all of our old helper functions work as expected! But are there any improvements that we could make there?

## `response` methods

You'll notice that every helper function that we've created does three things over and over again:

1. sets a status code for the response
2. stringifies and writes JSON payloads to the response body
3. terminates the response with `end()`

There are also some things that our helpers _don't_ do, but really should, like setting a `Content-Length` header based on the lngth of the response. This is not required, but it's a pretty good idea to give clients a hint about the size of the payload that you're sending back to them. And while we could manually add that header, `express` adds some helper methods to each `response` Object that provides most of those sane defaults out-of-the-box, as well as doing all three of the things listed above that our helpers already do. For our JSON API, the most important of these methods will be `response.json()` and `response.status()`.

In addition, these helper methods return a new `response` Object, making them _chainable_. So our entire `notFound` helper can now be re-written as `response.status(404).json({ message: 'Not Found' })`. Let's replace all of our helpers with `status` and `json` method chains and get rid of those functions entirely!

## Middleware

`express` is built around the idea of [middleware](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html). Middleware are functions that have access to the request and response Objects of their respective scopes. You can have `app`-level middleware, `router`-level middleware, or `route`-level middleware for any request or response logic that might need to be shared among handlers on those routes. You can think of every request passing through every middleware function on the way to a handler, and every response passing through every middleware function again on the way to the user. This design makes it very easy to implement app-level features like auth, request body parsing, caching, and database connection pooling.

Let's use the [`json` middleware of the `body-parser` npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/body-parser#bodyparserjsonoptions) to handle JSON _requests_ as well as responses.

## Activity 2

### JSON Body Parsing

0. Install the `body-parser` package with `npm install body-parser`

1. In your server, `require` and `use` the `json` body parser like so:

    ```javascript
    // previous require() statements and app configuration here
    const bodyParser = require('body-parser')

    app.use(bodyParser.json())
    ```

2. `body-parser` works by checking the `Content-Type` header of a request and parsing the body accordingly. Up to this point, we've been sending plain ol' text through `curl` (technically interpreted as `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`). But if we want our request bodies to be properly parsed automatically, we need to tell our server when we make our request! Try making a `POST` request that looks like this:

    ```bash
    curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"body": "This is another new post"}' localhost:8675
    ```

    Notice the new JSON format of our request body, and notice the `-H` option letting our server know that we're working with JSON in the request.

3. Before actually using that `curl` request, though, we'll want to make sure that we can handle that JSON body in our application. Thankfully, you'll find that this is much more intuitive than the previous `readableStream` implementation. Here's what our new `/posts` route should look like, for example:

    ```javascript
    app
      .route("/posts")
      .get((_request, response) => {
        const posts = db.get("posts").value();

        ok(response, posts)
      })
      .post((request, response) => {
        // notice that request.body is already valid JSON!
        const post = db.get("posts").insert(request.body).write();

        response.json(post)
      });
    ```

    Much simpler, don't you think? See if you can make the same refactor for your `/posts/:id` `PATCH` method

4. Now that we can use the richer JSON format for making requests, we can add additional properties to our posts! Try adding `title` and `author` properties to all of your `post` resources through the `PATCH` method, like so:

    ```bash
    curl -X PATCH -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"title": "Some new title", "author": "Your Name Here"}' localhost:8675/some-post-id
    ```
