# Routing and `Navigo`
Currently, there is no way to "directly" (via the URL) navigate to any page/view other than Home. We will need a [client-side router](https://medium.com/@wilbo/server-side-vs-client-side-routing-71d710e9227f) to listen for changes in the URL and help us handle them: `Navigo`.

## `Navigo`
To install [`Navigo`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/navigo), enter the following into your terminal:
```
npm install --save navigo
```
> **NOTE**: the `--save` flag adds Navigo to our `package.json` in `dependencies` (necessary for the deployment of our website/app) not `devDependencies` (necessary for the _development_ of our website/app)

We will use Navigo to create a `router` Object which will route our requests. Two methods we will chain onto our `router` Object are `on` and `resolve`. 

`router` works by chaining a number of different functions together. The two that we'll use are `on` and `resolve`. `on` uses a callback structure: whenever a URL matches the pattern given to `on` as its first argument, the function provided as the second argument is called. We use `resolve` at the end of the chain to kick off the client-side routing process.

We can handle multiple routes inside a single `on` method by passing-in an Object where the keys are routes and the values are the callback functions for those routes.
```javascript
// adding one route
router.on("/", () => console.log("Visiting Home Page")).resolve();

// adding more than one route
router.on({
  "routeOne": () => console.log("Visiting Route One"),
  "routeTwo": () => console.log("Visiting Route Two")
}) 
```

We can also handle/capture multiple routes with the use of a "variable" that then becomes a key in the default parameter Object passed into its callback function. 
```javascript
router.on(":x", defaultParam => defaultParam)
// returns:
// {x: "<route entered in URL>"}

router.on(":page", params -> params.page)
// returns:
// "<route entered in URL>"
```

## `Lodash`
[`Lodash`](https://lodash.com/) is a library of useful utility functions that make working with collections of data much easier. On top of the collections helpers, though, we will use a function that make working with Strings just a bit easier - `capitalize`.

To install `Lodash`, enter the following into your terminal:
```
npm install --save lodash
```
---
## Activity 1: Navigo routing in our state-driven SPA
1. In our root `index.js`, import the `Navigo` constructor/class and the capitalize method:
   ```javascript
   import Navigo from "navigo";
   import { capitalize } from "lodash";
   ```
2. To create our `router` Object, we need to create a `new` instance of Navigo by passing in our root URL - which we can access via `window.location.origin`:
   ```javascript
   const router = new Navigo(window.location.origin);
   ``` 
3. Let's use our `router` to replace our initial call of our render function by handling our home route ( `/` ). 
   ```javascript
   router.on("/", () => render(state.Home)).resolve()
   ```
4. Let's add another route to our `on` method. Use a "variable" like `:page` to catch all of the other routes. Once we capture the route entered by the user, we format the route with the Lodash `capitalize` function we imported earlier. Finally, we use the formatted route to access a piece of state which we pass into our render function.  
   ```javascript
   router.on({
     "/": () => render(state.Home), 
     ":page": params => {
       let page = capitalize(params.page);
       render(state[page]);
     }}).
   ```
5. Right now, we have custom event handlers listening for clicks on our navigation's `<a>` tags, preventing their default action, then rendering a piece of state. Navigo provides us with the functionality to handle `<a>` tag links/hrefs much more simply.
   1. In your `render` function, add the following line after adding your HTML content.
      ```javascript
      router.updatePageLinks();
      ``` 
   2. In order for the function above to take effect, we must alter our nav bar HTML a bit. Right now, our Nav functional component looks like this - with no value for the `href` because our event listener handled the navigation:
      ```javascript
      export default links => `
        <nav>
          <i class="fas fa-bars"></i>
          <ul class="hidden--mobile nav-links">
          ${links.map(
            link =>
              `<li><a href="#">${link}</a></li>`
          ).join()}
          </ul>
        </nav>
        `
      ```
      We need to use the values from our `links` Array to fill-in our route for our `href` and we need to add `data-navigo` to our `<a>` tag:
      ```javascript
      export default links => `
        <nav>
          <i class="fas fa-bars"></i>
          <ul class="hidden--mobile nav-links">
          ${links.map(
            link =>
              `<li><a href="/${link}" data-navigo>${link}</a></li>`
          ).join()}
          </ul>
        </nav>
        `
      ```
   3. Now we can remove our nav event listeners that handled our nav links. When a user clicks a nav link, they visit the route designated by `href` which is in turn handled by our `router` Object, rendering the correct view.
