# Whiteboard Coding Exercise

## **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Define a successful process for whiteboard interviewing
- Practice whiteboard exercise

<br>

---

## Steps for interview success!

1. Gather requirements
1. Break down the problem
1. Write Pseudocode
1. Code a solution
1. Test the solution
1. Consider improvements and/or changes

<br>

---

## Gathering Requirements

The goal is to clarify the problem to the point that there are no more questions regarding the presented problem.

- Asking too many questions is better than too few
- Establish what your input and output is support to be
- Find edge cases
- Write out requirements, to establish a "contract" with the interviewer
- Establish the programming language and the expected structure
- Should the code be run once aka "root" code
- Should the code be written in a function aka reusable code

<br>

---

## Break down the problem

...into manageable pieces

- Restate key points of the problem
- If the problem is complex, establish the priorities of the parts/steps

<br>

---

## Write Pseudocode

- Just use plain old English, like explaining it to your Grandma.
- Don’t write out any code or syntax
- Focus on structure


<br>

---

## Write a Solution

- Talk with your interviewer about what you are doing
- THINK OUT LOUD, TALK OUT LOUD
- Mistakes are okay!   When writing on the board.
- Syntax errors are NOT the end of the world!
- Be sure to write neatly, so your code can be read
- If whiteboard exercise digitally, you should be able to drop code in a Chrome developer console and execute as required

<br>

---

## Test

- Walk through the steps of your code verbally, OUT LOUD.
- Assign values your variables. Take us on an input’s journey!
- Test edge cases that were defined in the Gathering Requirements step

<br>

---

## Consider improvements and/or changes

- Review and fix any bugs
- Discuss ways to improve your code with the interviewer

<br>

---

## Whiteboard Exercise Rules and Expections

- Do NOT search for the solution for your question.
- You may use the [curriculum](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum) or [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/) as a reference for JavaScript.
- A team member should present one section:
- Requirements clarification & questions asked
- Break down the problem
- Present the pseudocode
- Present the code
- Run through and test the code
- The entire class will discuss improvements & enhancements.

<br>

---

## Question 1

Write a JavaScript function that takes in two integers and returns their sum, unless the two integers are equal. If the two integers are equal, then return three times their sum.

Examples:

```javascript
sum2Integers(10, 20) // --> 30
sum2Integers(10, 10) // --> 60
```

<br>

---

## Question 2

Write a JavaScript function that takes in integers and returns the integer with the highest value.

**(Do NOT use Math.max()!!!)**

Examples:

```javascript
findHighest(5, 8, 1) // --> 8
findHighest([4, 1, -3]) // --> 4
```

<br>

---

## Question 3

Write a function that generates a random number between 0-10.
If the number is greater than 5, log “{number} is greater than five!”.
If it is less than 5, log “{number} is less than five!”

<br>

---

## Question 4

Write a function that counts the number of vowels in a string.
The vowels are "a", "e", "i", "o" & "u"

Examples:

```javascript
findVowels('hello') // --> 2
findVowels('why') // --> 0
```

<br>

---

## Question 5

Write a function that determines if a string in a palindrome.
A palindrome is a string that is the same forward and backwards.

Examples:

```javascript
isPalindrome('racecar') // --> true
isPalindrome('table') // --> false
```
