# In-depth HTTP and RESTful API
Throughout the course, we've been working with API data and services from third parties like JSON Placeholder, `openweathermap.org`, and GitHub. To do so, we've been leveraging the same request and response model used behind-the-scenes by browsers to fetch HTML, submit form data, and download files. As we've seen before when working with `fetch` and `axios`, we can use JavaScript to leverage the same communication protocol used by the browser itself (called HTTP, or **H**yper **T**ext **T**ransfer **P**rotocol) to interact with API services that understand HTTP requests. While HTTP is not the only way to interact with external services, it is by far the most common because of the browser's native support. Now that we're building our own APIs to handle HTTP requests, let's take a closer look at what goes into an HTTP request and response.

## HTTP Methods
By this point, we should be familiar with some aspects of GET and POST requests. But there are more HTTP verbs to explore! Let's take a look at some of these methods and how we might see them used in the wild.

| HTTP Method | Use-case                                       | Request Body\* | Response Body\* | Safe | Idempotent |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|------|------------|
| **GET**     | Reading resources                              | empty          | not empty       | yes  | yes        |
| **POST**    | Often (but not always) creating new resources  | not empty      | not empty       | no   | no         |
| **PUT**     | Creating or updating a specific resource       | not empty      | not empty       | no   | yes        |
| **PATCH**   | Updating a specific resource                   | not empty      | not empty       | no   | no\*\*     |
| **DELETE**  | Deleting a specific resource                   | empty          | not empty       | no   | yes        |

> \* Request and response bodies often follow these conventions, but there are a number of variations between implemenations since adherence to these guidelines is entirely up to API authors. Some common variations might include `POST` or `PATCH` updates that only return a status code instead of returning a body that contains the new or edited resource, or `DELETE` requests that use a request body to identify the resource being deleted instead of using a URL.

When talking about HTTP methods, we further group those methods into "safe" methods (that don't alter data) and "idempotent" methods (which result in the same resource state no matter how many times the same request is made). Generally speaking, `GET` is the only truly safe method and all of the methods but `POST` should strive (see below) for idempotency.

> \*\* While PATCH requests are not _required_ to be idempotent, it's usually a good idea to make sure that your PATCH requests are idempotent anyway. There are some use-cases where a single PATCH dependes on the current state of a resource, but it's often better to handle the calculation of that new state on the client instead of in the server.

This is not an exhaustive list of HTTP methods, but these are the ones you'll encounter most often, and the methods that map most cleanly to the "CRUD" operations we've seen so far in the course. You can see an [exhaustive list of HTTP methods](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods) in the Mozilla documentation

## Activity (Everyone): Resource Manipulation with HTTP Methods
Let's create an HTTP service that will help us keep track of some blog posts.
1. In your practice SPA's `server` directory, create a new `index.js` file.
2. Let's set-up an empty `http` server by importing `http`, creating a server, and listening on a port
    ```js
    const http = require("http");

    const PORT = 4040;

    const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
      // our server logic will go here
    })

    server.listen(PORT)
    console.log(`Listening on port ${PORT}`)
    ```
3. What we really want is a single request handler for every `request.url` that starts with `/posts`, and separate functions for handling those requests for each method. That means that our top-level `if` condition in our server should look like this:
    ```js
    const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
      if (request.url.startsWith("/posts")) {
        // TODO: handle different request methods on the /posts endpoint
      }
    })
    ```
4. A common pattern in API design is to pull out distinct handlers for each method. Create a HANDLERS Object to hold the request handlers for each of the methods we'll be working with over our blog collection:
    ```js
    const HANDLERS = {
      // notice the capitalization!
      GET(request, response) {},
      // keep the following methods commented out until we need them
      // POST(request, response) {},
      // PATCH(request, response) {},
      // DELETE(request, response) {},
    }
    ```
5. To store our blog data, we _could_ use a single in-memory Object to model our database. We could also use a more fully-featured database like Postgres or Mongo, or a service like Firestore. Instead, we're going to use a tool called [**`lowdb`**](https://github.com/typicode/lowdb) to write out a simple data store to a `db.json` file. This is **not** a good production-ready solution, but it works great for small projects and local development.
    1. Install `lowdb` (our simple JSON database) and `lodash-id` (to automatically generate unique IDs for our database entries)
        ```bash
        npm install lowdb lodash-id
        ```
    2. In `server/index.js`, import the dependencies...
        ```js
        const path = require("path");
        const FileSync = require("lowdb/adapters/FileSync");
        const lodashId = require("lodash-id");
        const lowdb = require("lowdb");
        ```
    3. ...and configure the database
        ```js
        // use FileSync to create an adapter linked to a .json file
        const adapter = new FileSync(path.join(__dirname, "db.json"));
        // create a lowdb database and link it to the .json file
        const db = lowdb(adapter);
        // utilize lodashId to auto-generate unique IDs for our db entries
        db._.mixin(lodashId);
        // create a collection for blog posts and write it to the db
        db.defaults({ posts: [] }).write();
        ```
        > **NOTE**: The `__dirname` path component is a shorthand for the current file's parent directory, regardless of the working directory of where that file might be run.
6. Recall from our Echo Server, we used the same three methods to write a status code, a JSON payload, and end our `response` streams. Let's create three free-standing functions to encapsulate three of those variants into useful helpers that will simplify our code:
    ```js
    const notFound = (response) => {
      response.writeHead(404);
      response.write(JSON.stringify({ message: "Not Found" }));
      response.end();
    };

    const internalServerError = (response) => {
      response.writeHead(500);
      response.write(JSON.stringify({ message: "Internal Server Error" }));
      response.end();
    };

    const ok = (response, payload) => {
      response.writeHead(200);
      response.write(JSON.stringify(payload));
      response.end();
    };
    ```
7. Our helpers and handlers can now be used in our main request handler like so:
    ```javascript
    const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
      // set the content type for our response
      response.setHeader("Content-Type", "application/json");

      if (request.url.startsWith("/posts")) {
        // use the request method to access the corresponding handler
        const handler = HANDLERS[request.method];

        // if the handler function exists,
        if (handler) {
          // handle the request and response
          handler(request, response);
        } else {
          // if request method not found in the HANDLERS object,
          notFound(response);
        }
      } else {
        // if request url doesn't start with "/posts",
        notFound(response);
      }
    });
    ```
8. At the moment, since it is empty, our `GET` handler will never terminate the response stream. Let's use `lowdb` to query all of the posts that currently exist (which should be an empty Array):

    ```javascript
    const HANDLERS = {
      GET(request, response) {
        // get "posts" collection
        const posts = db.get("posts");
        // send ok response with posts data
        ok(response, { posts: posts.value() })
      }
    }
    ```
    Make sure this works as expected with `curl localhost:4040/posts`
9. We're going to continue to assume that we're only able to send plain text to our API, so let's assume that we want to use `POST` to create a new blog post with a `body` set to the text in the request body. That would look something like this:

    ```javascript
    const HANDLERS = {
      POST(request, response) {
        // construct contents of request data
        let contents = ""
        request.on("data", (chunk) => (contents += chunk));

        request.on("end", () => {
          // create/write new post in the db
          const post = db.get("posts").insert({ body: contents }).write();
          // send ok response with constructed post data
          ok(response, post);
        });

        // use internal server error response if error interrupts request
        request.on("error", () => internalServerError(response));
      }
    }
    ```

    You can POST a new blog post with a request like `curl -X POST -d 'This is my new blog post' localhost:4040/posts` after which you can `GET` all of the existing blog posts. Try POST-ing a few more to build up a collection of posts! Notice how multiple POST requests with the exact same inputs will continue creating new blog posts, since POSTs are neither _safe_ nor _idempotent_.
10. As we build a collection of blog posts, you might notice that we can only GET the entire collection of posts. That's probably not how we actually want to interact with that collection all the time; most likely, we'll also want to have the option of GET-ing a single post if we already know its `id`. This pattern is commonly expressed through a resource URL that follows the pattern of `:host/:resource/:id`. In this case, that would be something like e.g. `localhost:4040/posts/42648ec2-40f9-4333-8266-9afc6f589b6a`.

    ```javascript
    const HANDLERS = {
      GET(request, response) {
        const posts = db.get("posts");

        if (request.url === "/posts") {
          // only send back the entire collection when the URL matches /posts exactly
          ok(response, { posts: posts.value() });
        } else {
          // otherwise, split up the url by '/' to try to find a post ID
          const parts = request.url.split("/");

          // TODO: explore better ways to do this!
          if (parts.length === 3) {
            const id = parts.pop();
            const post = posts.getById(id).value();

            // if a post exists with that ID,
            if (post) {
              ok(response, post);
            } else {
              // if no post found with that ID,
              notFound(response);
            }
          } else {
            // if more than 3 parts to the request url,
            notFound(response);
          }
        }
      },
    }
    ```
11. We need to be able to **update** blog posts once they're created. To do that, let's implement `PATCH`. Like our GET request for a single resource above, we also want to PATCH a single resource by an `id` provided as part of the request URL. That means that our PATCH logic is a combination of the logic we used for GET-ing a single post and POST-ing new content:

    ```javascript
    const HANDLERS {
      PATCH(request, response) {
        const parts = request.url.split("/");

        // as before, we can search the URL for an id...
        if (parts.length === 3) {
          // ...and construct the contents of the request data
          let contents = "";
          request.on("data", (chunk) => (contents += chunk));

          request.on("end", () => {
            const id = parts.pop();

            // updateById returns a post only if one already exists with that ID
            const post = db.get("posts").updateById(id, { body: contents }).write();

            if (post) {
              ok(response, post);
            } else {
              notFound(response);
            }
          });

          request.on("error", () => internalServerError(response));
        } else {
          notFound(response);
        }
      },
    }
    ```
12. And finally, we might want to DELETE a post we had already made:

    ```javascript
    const HANDLERS {
      DELETE(request, response) {
        const parts = request.url.split("/");

        if (parts.length === 3) {
          const id = parts.pop();
          // like updateById, removeById will only return a post if a post exists with that ID
          const post = db.get("posts").removeById(id).write();

          if (post) {
            ok(response, post);
          } else {
            notFound(response);
          }
        } else {
          notFound(response);
        }
      },
    }
    ```

Make sure that all of these methods work locally through `curl`! In the time remaining, see if you can _break_ this API. What are the edge-cases that we haven't covered? What might be some concerns you have about sharing this API with other users?

## REST

In previous lessons or in documentation that you've seen while exploring on your own, you'll probably have heard APIs described as "RESTful". Unlike HTTP, REST (or **Re**sponsive **S**tate **T**ransfer) is not a protocol or specification; rather, REST is an architectural pattern. It is not the only way to build APIs, nor is it necessarily coupled to HTTP as a means of transferring state responsively, but we'll find that the principles of a RESTful architecture map intuitively to the HTTP protocol that we've been using thus far. And we will find that the blog API that we just built is, in fact, a RESTful API.

RESTful applications are built around 5 core values:

1. Client-Server Separation
2. Statelessness
3. Cacheable Resources
4. Uniform Interface
5. Layered Architecture

Note that nowhere do these values mention specific protocols like HTTP, or data formats like JSON. But let's look at why it's so common to find RESTful APIs that use HTTP to expose data as JSON:

### Client-Server Separation, Statelessness, and Cacheable Resources

These requirements are met simply by using HTTP. As we've already discovered, HTTP forces servers to handle generic requests that might come from any number of clients, which also enforces a general client-server separation. Additionally, HTTP requests and responses can only contain headers and bodies; all state must be included in one of those places, in every request and every response, which satisfies the statelessness requests. And finally, the consistent format of HTTP requests means that any request or response could be stored (or "cached") without requiring a persistent connection to the underlying HTTP service.

### Uniform Resouces

We've intuitively stumbled upon this principle in our existing API by leveraging HTTP methods: once you know that you can interact somehow with a "post" resource, then you can surmise that `GET /posts` would get you the entire collection of posts, `GET /posts/:id` would get you a single post, `POST /posts` would create a new post, `PATCH /posts/:id` would edit a post if it exists, `DELETE /posts/:id` would delete a post if it exists, and `PUT /posts/:id` would create a new post with a specific `id` if it didn't already exist, and update that post if it existed before. You can apply that same logic to any resource that we might want to create in the future, from "author" to "reader" and so on and so forth. That consistent pattern of accessing resources through a Unique Resource Identitfier (or URI, also known as a URL) gives RESTful APIs a discoverability missing from APIs designed without such constraints.

### Layered Architecture

And finally, we've found that the use of HTTP + JSON + Node + a format-agnostic data store have given us an architecture that can is interchange-able at the interfaces; we could exchange our database for Firestore or Postgres at any time, and the user consuming JSON from our API would never know. We could switch from Node to Deno or to Python or Ruby a compiled Go or Rust binary and, as long as the HTTP service contract was maintained, the user would never know.

Since our blog API meets all of the above specifications, you've now written your first RESTful API!
