# Connecting the SPA to the ReST API

### **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Connecting a working SPA and ReST API server
- Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
- Steps to add a View to the SPA that consumes the API

<br>

---

<br>

### Bringing it all together ...

At this point we have a working SPA and ReST API server running disconnected. It is time to connect them up so that the SPA can use the data stored in the MongoDB database.

<br>

---

<br>

## Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)

**Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)** is an HTTP-header based mechanism that allows a server to indicate any other origins (domain, scheme, or port) than its own, from which a browser should permit loading of resources.

For security reasons, modern browsers restrict cross-origin HTTP requests initiated from scripts.

> Read more about CORS at: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS

<br>

Let's add a CORS middleware to the `server/index.js` that adds the necessary headers and, in our case, _allows any origin to access our server_.

> Note: This isn't advised for a production application and violates every security measure, so don't do this in a real enterprise application.

<br>

Right below where the logging middleware is defined add the CORS middleware

```
// CORS Middleware
const cors = (req, res, next) => {
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Headers",
    "X-Requested-With,content-type, Accept,Authorization,Origin"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Methods",
    "GET, POST, OPTIONS, PUT, PATCH, DELETE"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Credentials", true);
  next();
};
```

Now we need to use the CORS middleware for it to be functional. Let's add the use statement next the the `app.use(logging);` statement.

```
app.use(cors);
```

<br>

---

<br>

## Add a Pizza! view to the SPA that consumes the API

We are now ready to create a view in the SPA that fetches the list of pizzas from the API via Axios, and displays them.

<br>

### Create the Pizza! view and update the `components/views/index.js` file

<br>

1.  We need to create a view template file in the `components/views` folder named `Pizza.js` and add the template which will display the list in an HTML table.

```
export default st => `
<table id="pizzas">
<tr><th>Crust</th><th>Cheese</th><th>Sauce</th><th>Toppings</th></tr>
${st.pizzas
  .map(pizza => {
    return `<tr><td>${pizza.crust}</td><td>${pizza.cheese}</td><td>${
      pizza.sauce
    }</td><td>${pizza.toppings.join(" & ")}</td></tr>`;
  })
  .join("")}
</table>
`;
```

2.  Next we need to add the `Pizza` file to the `components/views/index.js` file so that the view can be retrieved successfully by the SPA.

```
export { default as Pizza } from "./Pizza";
```

3.  And let's make it look better by adding some styles to the `styles.css` file right below the `#gallery img` CSS block.

```
#pizzas {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  font-size: 1.2em;
  height: auto;
  width: 92.5%;
  margin: auto;
}

#pizzas tbody {
  width: 100%;
}

#pizzas th {
  text-align: left;
}

#pizzas td,th {
  width: 25%;
}
```

Our view is now complete but there is no data to display the view. So, let's add the Pizza! store...

<br>

### Create the Pizza! store and update the `store/index.js` file

<br>

We need to create a store file in the `store` folder named `Pizza.js` and add the JSON object that the SPA expects to be able to display the view.

```
export default {
  header: "List of Pizzas",
  view: "Pizza",
  pizzas: []
};
```

> Note that `pizzas` is initialized as an empty array to reduce the likelihood of an error being produced due to the value being undefined.

<br>

Next we need to add the `Pizza` file to the `store/index.js` file so that the view can be retrieved successfully by the SPA.

```
export { default as Pizza } from "./Pizza";
```

<br>

### Update the navigation to include Pizza!

<br>

As previously discussed we need to update the `store/Links.js` file to include the Pizza! link in the header nav menu by adding the following to the end of the links array.

```
{ title: "Pizza", text: "Pizza!" }
```

> Don't forget to add a comma to the previous object in the array.

<br>

### Update the SPA `index.js` file to retrieve the Pizza! list.

<br>

Since we are going to be using Axios to make our HTTP requests, we need to install it.

```
npm install axios
```

We need to import Axios so that we can reference it. At the top of the file with the other imports add Axios.

```
import axios from "axios";
```

Now that we have Axios we need to put it to use. At the bottom of the `index.js` file let's add the `fetchDataByView` function to execute the HTTP request and inject the data into the store.

```
function fetchDataByView(st = state.Home) {
  switch (st.view) {
    case "Pizza":
      axios
        .get("http://localhost:4040/pizzas")
        .then(response => {
          state[st.view].pizzas = response.data;
        })
        .catch(error => {
          console.log("It puked", error);
        });
      break;
  }
}
```

> Note: We are only configuring the Pizza view at this point but using the switch allows for future views to be added, and only retrieve the data when the data is needed.

<br>

The final step is to call our `fetchDataByView` function at the bottom of the `render` function passing in `st` which represents the state.

```
fetchDataByView(st);
```

<br>

### Test and test again

Now test out the new Pizza! view, and enjoy!

Congratulations, this is great Pizza!

<br>

---

<br>

### **Summary: -**

In this module we look at ...

- Bring the frontend and backend together by connecting the SPA and the ReST API server
- Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
- Steps to add a Pizza! view to the SPA that consumes the API, and displays the results on the frontend
