# JavaScript Outside the Browser with `node`

## Node.js

So far, we've been using JavaScipt in the browser to give our users richer experiences in the web. But the JavaScript _language_ that we've been using in these browsers needs additional code to manage all of the housekeeping tasks that make JavaScript so simple to work with; tasks like memory management, eventing, and optimization. That additional code is called a _runtime_, and every browser includes some kind of JavaScript-specific runtime. While every browser's runtime has its own performance charteristics and specific implementations, they all support the exact same single-threaded event-driven characteristics of JavaScript that we know and love. In addition to that runtime, browsers expose some of their functionality to the JavaScript runtime through many of the browser-specific Objects and APIs that we've already encountered, like `window` or the DOM. But those browser-specific helpers are not an intrinsic part of either JavaScript-the-language or the runtimes that power that language. One might imagine, then, that the JavaScript runtimes that we've been using up to this point might be able to be separated entirely from the browser and run as their own process, giving JavaScript the power to run _anywhere_!

This is exactly what happened when Google open-sourced V8 (the JavaScript runtime packaged with Chrome). It wasn't long before many of those browser APIs that we've learned about were replaced with a new set of helpers for interacting with computers more directly than a browser would have allowed at the time. These helper APIs allowed developers to use the V8 engine to run JavaScript that worked directly with memory, file systems, and network interfaces on their own computers, outside of the browser. The combination of these helper APIs and the V8 runtime was packaged into its own browser-less JavaScript runtime called Node.js.

Today, Node.js is used wherever the compute resources exist to handle the requirements of the V8 Engine; from satellites, to servers, to command-lines, to text editors! As you might recall from the very first class, we've been using many of these tools from the beginning: `npm`, `parcel`, `eslint` and even VS Code are written in JavaScript as Node applications.

> Note: `node` isn't the only browser-less JavaScript runtime in town any more! Check out [Deno](https://deno.land/)

---

## Node Javascript versus Browser JavaScript

### REPL

We've extensively used the browser console to try out functions or debug existing applications. You'll recall that this developer console was called, more generally, a "REPL" (**R**ead **E**valuate **P**rint **L**oop). Node.js also includes a REPL, accessible in your terminal with `node`. Try typing `node` in your terminal, inputing some JavaScript expresssions. To exit, you can use `CTRL + D` or type `.exit`

### `window` vs `global`

While JavaScript-the-language is mostly the same between Node and evergreen browsers, many of the helper APIs that we've come to rely on in the browser are different or missing. Let's explore the biggest diffence between the two platforms: Node's `global` versus the browser's `window` Objects.

---

### **Exercise 1 (Instructor)**

#### Explore the global object: [1-Ins-GlobalExample](10.1-Activities/1-Ins-GlobalExample.js)

```javascript
node ./10.1-Activities/1-Ins-GlobalExample.js
```

Notice that we still have access to many of the global timer methods from the browser (i.e. `setTimeout` and `setInterval`), but most of the rest of the `window` is missing.

---

### modules

By default, Node.js uses a module system called CommonJS. This module system predates the `import`/`export` statements we've been using for browser modules so far, but maps well to our current understanding of modules:

| Browsers (ES6 modules)                   | Node (CommonJS)                                               |
|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| `import DefaultThing from 'some-module'` | `const DefaultThing = require('some-module')`                 |
| `import { Thing } from 'some-module'`    | `const { DefaultThing } = require('some-module')`             |
| `export default DefaultThing`            | `module.exports = DefaultThing`                               |
| `export Thing`                           | `module.exports = { Thing }` or `module.exports.Thing = Thing`|

Notice that CommonJS modules are imported with a globally-availabe `require()` function, and are exported through the `exports` property of a module-level Object called `module`.

### Example:

```javascript
// mathUtilities.js
module.exports.add = (a, b) => a + b
module.exports.subtract = (a, b) => a - b
```

Then to import the functions from `mathUtilities.js`:

```javascript
// some other file
const mathUtilities = require('./mathUtlities')
mathUtilities.add(1, 2)
mathUtilities.subtract(5, 2)
```

We've seen how to require locally-defined modules, we can also `require` `node_modules` installed through `npm` in the same manner, e.g:

```javascript
// imported from the nearest node_modules
const parcel = require('parcel')
```

### built-in modules

Node.js ships with built-in modules that you can `require` and use in your code. There are different modules that you can bring in depending on what goal you're trying to accomplish.
Below are some examples:

- `path`
  - The `path` module provides utilities for working with file and directory paths. This module can help normalize paths, determine file extensions, return specific parts of a file path, etc.
- `crypto`
  - The `crypto` module provides utilities for cryptographic functionality. Useful for creating hashes or working with private/public key infrastructure, etc.
- `fs`
  - The `fs` module provides utilities for interacting with the file system. This is how we create, read, update, and delete files from the computer running our Node scripts.
- `http`
  - The `http` module is used to create handle HTTP requests and responses in a Node process.

You can learn more about the different built-in modules on the [Node.js website](https://nodejs.org/api/)

## Instructor-lead activities:

### Activity 2 (Everyone)

#### Creating and Deleting Files

Let's `node` to read and write some files to our local file system!

1. In any directory to which you have write permissions, create a file called `fileCreation.js`. At the top of the file, add the following `require` statements:

    ```javascript
    const fs = require('fs')
    const path = require('path')
    ```

2. Let's work to create a directory on our computer! In this case, we only want to work with a temporary directory that will be cleaned up for us by our operating system even if we forget to delete the contents of that directory. `fs` gives us a way of creating those temporary directories through [`fs.mkdtempSync()`](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_mkdtempsync_prefix_options) (more will be said about that "Sync" in a bit). This function generates a temporary directory for us, returning the name of that new directory. To remove that directory when we're finished, we can use [`fs.rmdirSync`](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_rmdirsync_path_options). Add the following to your script, then run the thing with `node ./fileCreation.js` to see what happens!

    ```javascript
    const directory = fs.mkdtempSync('savvy-tmp')

    console.log(directory)

    // TODO: use the temporary directory

    fs.rmdirSync(directory)
    ```

    Notice that the `directory` path is empty by the time the script finishes its run!

3. Let's explore the `fs` module a bit more as we look to create some files. If you give [the `fs` module documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html) a quick skim, you'll notice a number of different methods for writing files. In general, Node's built-in modules will provide three different "flavors" of functions that you can use to accomplish the same task:
    1. __`*Sync` (or synchronous)__. These functions are _synchronous_, which means that the event loop that manages tasks for your Node process (much like in the browser) will completely stop execution until the function finishes its task (if ever!). These functions make control flow easy to reason about, but should be avoided when working with operations that will block the main thread for long amounts of time. For writing files, this is `fs.writeFileSync`.
    2. __callback-based__. These functions are _asynchronous_, which means that we can assign some work to be executed whenver the function completes without blocking the entire Node process. This assignment is done through a _callback_ function, much like we've seen when working with Events in the browser. Before we had asynchronous primitives in JavaScript (i.e. `Promise`), callbacks were the preferred method of working with long-running tasks (like interacting with a file system). As the complexity of those asynchronous tasks increases, though, callback functions require deeper and deeper nesting, resulting in "callback hell" or "triangles of doom". For writing files, this is `fs.writeFile`
    3. __`Promise`-based__. These functions are _asynchronous_, but return `Promise`-es that can be handled with `.then()` and `.catch()` (or, as we'll see later on, `await`-ed). The `Promise`-based workflow is generally easier to read and reason about than nested callbacks while avoiding the performance pitfalls of the synchronous versions when many long-running tasks must be handled at the same time. But Promises incur their own overhead, meaning that the Promise-based methods are best suited to handling complex codebases or situations where the synchronous methods would block the main thread for too long. For writing files, this is the `fs.promises.writeFile` method.

    For our quick scripts, the `*Sync` methods are perfectly fine. Let's create a new file with `writeFileSync` in our new temporary directory. The following should be added to `fileCreation.js` at the `TODO` comment in the previous step:

    ```javascript
    fs.writeFileSync(`${directory}/my-new-file`, 'hello new file!')
    ```

4. In the previous step, we used a template literal to create our file path. But remember that paths are handled differently across operating systems, and that jamming strings together might lead to extra path delimiters or missed absolute versus relative formats! Instead, let's use the `path` module to properly `join` these parts of a path together:

    ```javascript
    fs.writeFileSync(path.join(directory, 'my-new-file'), 'hello new file!')
    ```

5. Finally, let's read the contents of the newly-created file with `fs.readFileSync`, emitting those contents to the console. Like `writeFileSync`, `readFileSync` takes a file path as its first argument. Unlike `writeFileSync`, we have to tell Node to use `utf8` encoding if we'd like to get the contents of the file back in a way that we can read. Without that option, Node will read the contents of the file as a collection of bytes. Let's refactor the above section to the following:

    ```javascript
    const newFilePath = path.join(directory, 'my-new-file')

    fs.writeFileSync(newFilePath, 'hello new file!')

    const contents = fs.readFileSync(newFilePath, 'utf8') // notice the encoding!

    console.log(contents)
    ```

## Activity 3: Implementing a basic HTTP service

While working with file systems is very useful, Node's event-driven model and penchant for asynchronous programming mean that it really shines when used to serve content to thousands of requests at a time. We often refer to the computers that listen to such requests "servers", and you'll often hear Node referred to as a "server-side" JavaScript runtime. Because these hardware servers are rarely running anything other than a collection of applications to handle requests, those applications are also often called "servers" themselves. The most common way for web applications (like the ones we've been building so far) to make requests of servers is through HTTP. Let's build our own application (or "service" or "server") to serve up content for web applications!

1. Same as the last activity, let's create a new file called echoServer.js to hold our program and import the http module

    ```javascript
    const http = require('http')
    ```

2. Let's first create a `server` to hold the output of the `http.createServer` method. This method takes an options Object and a request listener callback function. This callback is invoked with two arguments: a `Request` Object and a `Response` Object (which describe the incoming HTTP request and outgoing response, respectively).

    ```javascript
    const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {})
    ```

3. `Request` Objects contain information about incoming requests, such as the headers associated with the request, the requested URL, and the body of the request itself. Because `Request` Objects are just Objects, we can log individual properties for inspection, e.g.:

    ```javascript
    const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
      console.log(request.url) // logs the requested URL
    })
    ```

4. Servers need to _listen_ for requests on a `port`. We've seen `parcel` use a `port` to serve our projects on `localhost`, and we can do the same here. Pick an unused port between 2000 and 9000 to listen for requests upon, then call your `server` Object's `listen` method with that `port`, e.g.:

    ```javascript
    // by convention, contsant values are SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE
    const PORT = 8675

    server.listen(PORT);
    ```

5. Add a `log` after `listen` to let us know that the server is running:

    ```javascript
    console.log(`Listening on Port: ${PORT}`);
    ```

6. Start the program using the command `node echoServer.js`

7. Now to make a request! Remember that browsers make `GET` requests on our behalf, so we can navigate to `localhost:$PORT` in the browser (replacing `$PORT` with your actual `PORT`) to see the `request.url` property get logged to the console.

8. Most servers serve different content at different URLs. Let's start responding to different request URLs by creating an `if` block that will only respond if req.url === "/" (the root URL without a `pathname`)

    ```javascript
      if (request.url === "/") {
      }
    ```

9. Inside the `if` block there are several items we are going to set on the response. Every HTTP request and response needs to communicate what kind of `Content-Type` is going to be returned by the response, and what kind of content is `Accept`-able when the request is made. Most of the data that we'll send back and forth will be JSON, so let's set the `Content-Type` of all of our responses to `application/json` to give clients a hint about how to parse the response body. The `response` has a `writeHead` method that can be used to write headers to the response. The writeHead method accepts a status code, optional status message and optional options object. We are going to set the status code to 200 (the standard OK status for HTTP responses) and then an options object containing our `Content-Type` header.

    ```javascript
        response.writeHead(200, { "Content-Type": "application/json" });
    ```

10. Next, we are to write a JavaScript Object to the root URL

    ```javascript
    response.write(JSON.stringify({ message: Welcome to the main page }));
    ```

11. We will call response's end method to tell the server we are finished with this request/response cycle.

    ```javascript
    response.end();
    ```

12. Now let's try to get this data from the browser
13. Optional: build out a "/home" endpoint to send back content-type of text/html
