# Data Collections: Arrays & Objects

## Primitives & Collections
**Primitive data types** are meant to represent a _single piece of discrete data_. It can be a large piece (think of _War and Peace_ as a single String), but it's still just one item.

**Complex** or **Composite data types** represent _collections of data_. The Complex data types of JavaScript are **Array** and **Object**. 

We'll dig much deeper into both of these data types later, but for now, let's learn how to construct them using Literal Notation.

### Arrays & Objects
As all things in JS (besides primitives), Arrays are another type of 'built-in' Object. Arrays and Object Literals share many similarities. 

---
## Arrays
**Arrays** are _ordered lists of data_. The data can be of any type, including String, Number, Boolean, `undefined`, or even variables and functions. Arrays are written with opening and closing brackets - `[ ]` and each piece of data _delimited_ by a comma - `,`.

```javascript
[ 1, true, "data", [ "0", "1" ], null, { 0: 0, 1: 1 } ]
```

### Indexing
Arrays are also zero-indexed, which means that the first piece of data in the collection has a position of **0** (_instead of 1_).

An Array is just a special type of Object in JS.
**Array keys** are always _Numbers_ and are _automatically created_ for us by JS.
Values in Arrays are accessed using _Numbers_ in **bracket notation**.

### Length
Because Arrays are a special type of _Object_, we can use `.` (_dot notation_) to access some **properties** and **methods** common to _all_ Arrays. One of the most useful *properties* of *Arrays* is `length`.
We've worked with for and while previously to create loops. Let's combine this knowledge with what we just learned about Arrays.

### for...of
By now, you're familiar with `while` and `for` and can presumably *iterate* over any given Array with either of those. Let's consider another *iterator pattern* (way to loop over stuff): `for...of`. 

If you understand the `for` *loop,* you'll appreciate the cleaner *syntax* offered up by `for...of`.

```javascript
const names = ["Tracy", "Kenneth", "Liz", "Jack"];

for (let name of names) {
  console.log(name);
}
```
---
### **Exercise 1 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with Arrays: [1-Evr-Arrays](3.3-Activities/1-Evr-Arrays)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.3-JSArrays%26Objects/3.3-Activities/1-Evr-Arrays.js)

---
---
## Objects
Everything in JavaScript is an **Object**...except for _primitives_.

We introduced JS Objects when examining the global window object. Let's review some basic syntax for Objects: 
* JS Objects are scoped with `{ }`, and consist of collections of **key-value pairs**. 
* All of the **keys** must be strings. 
* The **values** can be of any data type such as the primitives we have seen before. They can also be other _complex data_ types such as Objects or Arrays. 

Objects are collections of data just like Arrays, but we can access data by name/_key_ instead of sequence. Keys are themselves arbitrary Strings that you're free to make up as you see fit.

>**NOTE**: With **JS Objects**, we _don't have to_ put quotation marks around our keys because no matter what JS will expect those to be Strings.
With **JSON** (which is not JS), we _must always_ put those quotation marks around each and every key 

### Accessing Properties
Just like Arrays, we can access items inside an Object. Instead of accessing values by index, we access values by key. We can access data inside Objects by using either bracket notation or dot notation. 

So, with bracket notation, what's the difference with using quotation marks or not? Well, recall that quotation marks make some text behave as a string, whereas the absence of quotation marks means that JS is expecting to find a variable of that name.

---
### Exercise 2 (Students)
#### More practice with Objects: [2-Stu-MorePracticeWithObjects](3.3-Activities/2-Stu-MorePracticeWithObjects.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.3-JSArrays%26Objects/3.3-Activities/2-Stu-MorePracticeWithObjects.js)

---
### Methods
When we scope a _function_ inside of an object literal, we call this a **method**.

```javascript
const obj = {
  property: "properties are data, either a single piece or a collection",
  method: function () {
    return "methods are functions within the scope of an object"
  }
}
```
We have seen and used methods many times already. `log` is a method of the `console` object. When we call `console.log()`, we invoke the _method_/function `log` which prints messages to the console.

---
## Mutation
A [mutable](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Mutable) is a type of variable that can be changed. In JavaScript, only _Objects and Arrays_ are **mutable**. _Primitive values_ are **immutable** - they cannot be changed.

> **NOTE**: `const` DOES NOT mean 'constant.' It just means that we cannot **reassign** a new *value* to a `const` _variable_.

---
### **Exercise 3 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with mutation: [3-Evr-Mutation](3.3-Activities/3-Evr-Mutation.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.3-JSArrays%26Objects/3.3-Activities/3-Evr-Mutation.js)

---
---
## Reference & Value
We've come to understand that programming and computers work with pieces of data that are stored in memory. We manage the data by using _variables_ to **reference** that data as needed. We've also learned that JS classifies all of the _data types_ into 2 categories: **primitives** and **composite**/collections. And we just learned that _primitives_ are **immutable**, while _composites_ are **mutable**.

### Comparing by Reference & Value
Thus far, we've used the *comparison operator* ( `===` ) to check if two **values** are the same. Up until now, there hasn't been too much confusion in regard to this because we've only done that with _primitives_. However, when we compare _composite data types_, we can get some unexpected results. _Primitives_ are **compared by value**, but _composites_ are **compared by reference** - "**by reference**" means reference to a 'spot' in the computer's memory or a 'memory address.' 

An analogy might help illustrate this. You can think of the computer's _memory addresses_ as a wall of _PO Boxes_ like you might see inside of a Post Office. _Inside_ of each of those _PO Boxes_, we can have some _mail_ (_values_). When using `===` to compare "primitive" _PO Boxes_, we compare the _mail_/values/contents inside - **compare by value**. If comparing "composite" _PO Boxes_, we only check the _PO Box Number_/reference - a reference that is different for each _PO Box_, even if the boxes each have _mail_/value that "looks" the same.

So for **primitives**, if two *values* 'look' the same, comparing with `===` will result in `true`. However, with **composites**, looks don't matter. What matters is whether or not they are *referencing* the same 'address' in memory.


### Pass by Reference & Value
When "passing" a variable to another variable, primitives and composites act differently. Primitives are treated as two separate values, and they behave independently of each other.
```javascript
// create a variable referencing a primitive value
let y = 3;

// "pass" the value to x
// x and y === 3, but each is referencing a different copy of the value
let x = y;

// function to mutate
const addOne = num => num + 1;

// mutate y
// now, y === 4
addOne(y)

// x is still === 3
console.log(x);
```

When passing a data collection, the variable passes a _reference_ to the data collection. After mutating the value referenced by one variable, the effects are present in both variables.
```javascript
// create a variable referencing a composite value
const x = { name: "Manav" };

// "pass" the value to y
// x and y each reference the same JS Object
const y = x;

// mutate a property of the Object through variable x
x.name = "Dhanav";

// because x and y reference the same Object, y is effected by mutations to x
console.log(y.name); // 'Dhanav'
```

---
### **Exercise 4 (Students)**
#### Practice with reference and value: [4-Stu-ReferenceAndValue](3.3-Activities/4-Stu-ReferenceAndValue.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.3-JSArrays%26Objects/3.3-Activities/4-Stu-ReferenceAndValue.js)

---