# Functions
What if we could save a block of code just like we could save chunks of data to variables? Luckily, we can do exactly that by creating a new function!
In the simplest sense, we use *functions* to 'wrap up' some code and give it a name so that we can just *invoke* it 'upon demand.' This means less repetitive code.

> In JS, we should consider "function" to take the broader meaning of another related term: "procedure". A procedure is a collection of statements that can be invoked one or more times, may be provided some inputs, and may give back one or more outputs. - You Don't Know JS Yet!

---
## Function Declaration, Invocation, & `return`
### Function Declaration
JS functions start with the `function` keyword, followed by parentheses for the function's _arguments_ or _parameters_, followed by braces that define the function's _scope_ (the code that will run when the function is _called_ or _invoked_).

> *Functions* are first-class citizens in JS. This means that **anything** that we can do with other *data types*, we can do with *functions.* 

With _function expressions_ we save a function to a variable like so:
```javascript
// function expression
const myFirstFunction = function () {
  console.log("This is my first function.")
}
```
There is another, cleaner way writing functions called a _functional declaration_:
```javascript
// function declaration
function myFirstFunction() {
  console.log("This is my first function.")
}
```
The meaning of these code samples is the same: "create a function and put it into the variable `myFirstFunction`".

---
### **Exercise 1 (Students)** 
#### Refactor function expressions into declarations: [1-Stu-FunctionDeclaration.js](3.2-Activities/1-Stu-FunctionDeclaration.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/1-Stu-FunctionDeclaration.js)

---

### Function Invocation
What's the difference between the two lines below?
```javascript
myFirstFunction;
myFirstFunction();
```
The first just accesses the data stored in the variable, which includes the whole function() phrase. But we really want to _invoke_ the function instead, which is what happens when we use the parentheses after the name of the stored function (e.g. myFirstFunction()). Now we actually _run_ the code inside of the curly braces instead of just displaying it.

---
### **Exercise 2 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with function invocation: [2-Evr-FunctionInvocation.js](3.2-Activities/2-Evr-FunctionInvocation.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/2-Evr-FunctionInvocation.js)
> **Built-in Functions**: The function console.log() is a built-in function recognized by browsers everywhere. Some functions are so commonly used that they're simply a part of the language, otherwise we'd have to replicate those functions in nearly every JavaScript project.

---

### `return`
The [**return statement**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/return) ends function execution and specifies a value to be returned to the function caller.

```javascript
function myFunction() {
  return "This is myFunction's return."
}
```
If we don't include an *explicit* `return`, then `function` returns `undefined`. 

> **"Short Circuiting"**: Another feature of `return` is that any code that comes after a `return` will not execute. We can use this feature of return to avoid writing `else` sometimes.

---
### **Exercise 3 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with returns and short circuiting: [3-Evr-ReturnsAndShortCircuiting.js](3.2-Activities/3-Evr-ReturnsAndShortCircuiting.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/3-Evr-ReturnsAndShortCircuiting.js)

---
---
## Parameters & Arguments
### Parameters
_Named parameters_ give our inputs (_arguments_) variable names while the function is running. 
We use a named parameter for _each_ of the arguments that we expect to receive. 
As the arguments come in, they are assigned to the next available parameter. 
In JavaScript, function parameters default to undefined.
Default function parameters allow named parameters to be initialized with default values if no value is passed.

### Rest Parameter (`...`)
The [**rest parameter**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters) syntax allows us to represent an indefinite number of arguments as an _array_.
A function's _last parameter_ can be prefixed with `...` which will cause all remaining (user supplied) arguments to be placed within an array.
_Only_ the last parameter can be a "rest parameter".

---
### **Exercise 4 (Everyone)** 
#### Practice with parameters: [4-Evr-Parameters.js](3.2-Activities/4-Evr-Parameters.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/4-Evr-Parameters.js)

---
---
## Scope
Recall that we've mentioned the term [**scope**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Scope) in the past as it related to the `{ }` in `for`, `while` and `if` statements. The same concepts apply to functions and now's a good time to explore scoping more deeply.

Scope is the current _context_ of execution. The context in which values and expressions are "_visible_" or can be _referenced_. 
If a variable or other expression is not "in the current scope," then it is unavailable for use (i.e. A variable defined exclusively within a function _cannot_ be accessed from outside the function or within other functions). 
Scopes can also be layered in a hierarchy, so that child scopes have access to parent scopes, but _not vice versa_.

---
### **Exercise 5 (Students)**
#### Practice with functions and scope: [5-Stu-FunctionsAndScope.js](3.2-Activities/5-Stu-FunctionsAndScope.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/5-Stu-FunctionsAndScope.js)

---
---

## 'Pure' Functions
Ideally, functions should only do _one thing_ and do it _well_. Avoid writing functions that reach _outside_ of their _scope_ and cause **side effects** (e.g. calling other functions, using global variables) - whenever possible.

### Composing Functions 
**Composing functions** occurs when we use the `return` value of a `function` as an *argument* for another `function`.

### Modularity
By writing functions that just focus on doing one thing and one thing really well and applying _composition,_ we make our code more **modular**.

Modular code is written in such a way that _each piece_ of functionality is _separated_ into a `function` and then _composed_ in various ways to _extend_ an app's features and functionality (extensibility).

---
### **Exercise 6 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with pure functions: [6-Evr-PureFunctions.js](3.2-Activities/6-Evr-PureFunctions.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/6-Evr-PureFunctions.js)

---
---
## Callback Functions & Arrow Syntax
### Callback Functions
We've seen many examples of various data types (usually primitives) passed in as arguments to functions upon invocation. 
A **callback function** is a function passed into another function as an argument, which is then invoked inside the outer function to complete some kind of routine or action.
_Callback functions_ are a **critical** concept, and we will encounter this pattern throughout JS.

---
### **Exercise 7 (everyone)**
#### Practice with callbacks: [7-Evr-Callbacks.js](3.2-Activities/7-Evr-Callbacks.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/7-Evr-Callbacks.js)

---
### Arrow Syntax
An arrow function expression is a syntactically compact alternative to a regular function expression, although without access to some keywords. Arrow function expressions are ill suited as methods, and they cannot be used as constructors.

Arrow functions can have either a "concise body" or the usual "block body".
In a concise body, only an expression is specified, which becomes the implicit return value. In a block body, you must use an explicit return statement.

```javascript
// concise body
const greet = n => "Hello ${n}";

// block body
const greet = (n) => {return "Hello ${n}"};
```

---
### **Exercise 8 (students)**
#### Practice with arrow syntax: [8-Stu-ArrowSyntax.js](3.2-Activities/8-Stu-ArrowSyntax.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week3-JavaScript/3.2-JSFunctions/3.2-Activities/8-Stu-ArrowSyntax.js)

---