# Hosting the Backend: Heroku

<br>

## Our project so far ...

<br>

So far, all of our work has been done _locally_. This is common for development, but not very useful for APIs that we want to share with others.

You'll recall that our single-page app has both a local version (called "development") and a public version (called "production") which both track the `master` branch of your project's `git` repository.

<br>

## The Frontend

<br>

We used Netlify to deploy the public version of our single-page-app (frontend), but Netlify is built to serve primarily static content (like HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files) in what's called a **"serverless" environment \***.

Serverless environments do not support the kind of long-running services that we've just written; as you might expect, it's difficult to deploy a "server" to a platform that is explicitly "serverless".

<br>

## Heroku Deployment

<br>

To host our `express` server (backend), we'll use a another platform for deploying `git`-based long-running processes called [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/). Heroku has the benefit of a MongoDB plugin that will make it easier to use the document database we build for our Pizza posts.

> Heroku also has a PostgreSQL plugin build to use relational databases on the backend.

<br>

Let's walk through deploying our API to Heroku so that we can share our Pizza Store with the world!

<br>

---

<br>

### Activity: Deploying to Heroku

<br>

1. Make sure that you've signed up for a free Heroku account first! This will require email confirmation.

2. On the home page once you've logged in, click the `Create a new app` button. And choose a new app name.

3. Once you've chosen a name, pick the GitHub deployment method on the next screen. Just like Netlify, you should be able to search through a list of your repositories for automatic deployment. Select your SPA project, then click `Enable Automatic Deploys`.

4. Heroku looks for a `start` script in your `package.json` to decide how to run your `express` server. So in your `package.json`, add the following to your `scripts`:

   ```bash
   "start": "node ./server/index.js"
   ```

5. Once you stage and commit those changes, you should be able to watch the deployment process happen from the Overview dashboard before clicking the Open App button to see your API in action.

6. To see your request logs in real time, you can visit `https://dashboard.heroku.com/apps/YOUR-APP-NAME/logs`

<br>

---

<br>

## **\*** What is a Serverless Environment or Service?

Serverless architecture (also known as serverless computing or function as a service, FaaS) is a software design pattern where applications are hosted by a third-party service -- like Netlify-- eliminating the need for server software and hardware management by the developer.

"Serverless" refers to services that mask (abstract away) the details of the server etc. from the user. It's all about a contract and defined communication (API) between two parties who handle separate concerns.

Serverless does not mean servers are no longer needed, just that they are not user-managed or controlled.

In this model the provider dynamically allocates — and then charges (or not) the user for — only the compute resources and storage needed to execute a particular piece of code.
