# Create a new file
1. Inside Class Activities, add a new file called `2.2.3-JSMorePrimitives.js`
    1. In the file name, there are no spaces. Computers don't like spaces so the name is written in camel case
    2. The suffix of the file is .js. This is because we will be using JavaScript

# Activity
## Copy the following commented lines into the new file you created:

// create a variable "timeOfDay" and assign it a string


// create a variable "greeting" that references a template literal
// use "timeOfDay" in the template literal to create a message like "Good morning!" or "Good evening!"


// print "greeting"


// create a new variable, but do not assign it a value


// print the variable and its type
// ? what type should we expect?


// assign the variable a value that indicates the variable is purposely blank
// ? what value should we assign?


// print the variable and its type again
// ? what type should we expect?


// try to print a variable that does not exist
// ? what should we expect to print in the CLI?


// print "greeting" again
// ? will this line run?




## While going through this activity, navigate to Homework Repo -> Class Activities.
## To print what you are working on, type `node 2.2.3-JSMorePrimitives.js`

# Pushing the activity up to GitHub (in the development branch)
1. Open your terminal
2. Type `git add 2.2.3-JSMorePrimitives.js`
3. Type `git status`
    1. The file name should appear in green, saying it is ready to be staged
4. Type `git commit -m "JS Variables and Primitives Part 3"`
5. Type `git status`
    1. The file name should not appear, meaning it is waiting to be pushed up to GitHub
5. Type `git push`
6. Type `git status`
    1. The working tree should be clean
    2. This means that the changes you have made are in GitHu
