# Data Types & Variables
## Primitive Data Types I: String, Number, Boolean
[Primitives](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#Data_types) are data types that can only hold **one discrete piece of data**.

There are seven primitive data types in all, but two are beyond the scope of this course. Let's start with the three primitives we will use most:
1. _String_ - Strings are **characters contained inside single (`''`) or double (`""`) quotation marks**. JS works with the words just as they are shown. 
    ```javascript
    String Examples: 
    "Hello, world"
    'My name' 
    "23" 
    "true" 
    'It was the best of times, it was the blurst of times...'
    etc.
    ```
2. _Number_ - Numbers are **any numbers _not_ contained in quotation marks**. JS does not differentiate between integers (whole numbers) and floating point numbers (decimals). Numbers can also be written in scientific notation (In scientific notation, 700 is 7 x 10^2 or 7e2)
    ```javascript
    Number examples:
    23
    8675309
    1.99
    -1000
    9e3
    etc.
    ```
3. _Boolean_ - Booleans can be one of **only two values: `true` or `false`**. Notice that booleans are not wrapped in quotation marks.
    ```javascript
    Boolean examples:
    true
    false
    ```

### The `typeof` Operator
You can check/get the type of data for any _primitive_ by using the `typeof` _operator_ like so: 
```javascript
typeof "Manav";
typeof 550;
typeof false; 
```
The `typeof` operator returns the data type in a _string_ (i.e. "string", "number", "boolean")

> **TIP**: This can be handy when trying to debug your code. You can `log()` the `typeof` of some variable to make sure that the data type it references is what you expect.

### Data and Memory
To interact and give instructions to a computer, everything we do is in terms of data and memory. Data must be created and then stored in a computer's memory for future access. In fact, every single value that we create in JavaScript is stored in a generic area of memory commonly referred to as _the heap_. 

---
## Variables
In programming, it's commonplace to create 'references' to these values in memory. This is the concept of '**instantiating a variable**' (`const`, `let`) and '**assigning a value to a variable**' (`=`). Whenever a _value_ in memory no longer has a _reference_ to it, the JS _garbage collector_ comes along to completely remove it from memory.

### `const` vs. `let`
Two keywords allow us to create a variable: `const` and `let`.
If we create a variable with `const`, the variable _cannot_ be reassigned with a new value. However, if we create a variable with `let`, the variable _can_ be mutated(changed) and/or reassigned. 

```javascript
const name;
let favoriteSong;
```

> **NOTE**: You may have seen JS variables created with the keyword `var`. The keyword `var` is used in pre-ES6 JavaScript to create a variable, and we will not be using it in class.

### Assignment Operator: `=`
The assignment operator (`=`) is used to link variables to the values they reference. The assignment operator works right to left, for example:
```javascript
let age = 29;
```
In this example, we are creating a _value_ (`29`) on the right and a _variable_ (`age`)on the left. The _assignment operator_ takes the value on the _right_ and assigns it to the variable on the _left_. 

### Dynamic Typing
As a language, JavaScript is **dynamically typed** (or _loosely typed_) - we don't have to explicitly declare what type of data will be stored in a variable, and we can replace data of one type with any other type of data.

---
### **JS Exercise 1 (Everyone)**
> **TIP**: Until we 'connect' our JS to HTML and run things in Chrome, you can run a JS file in your terminal. Make sure you are in the directory with the file you want to run, then enter `node fileName.js` in the CLI to execute the file.
#### Practice with variables and primitive data types: [1-Evr-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js](2.2.2-Activities\1-Evr-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week2-IntroTojavaScript/2.2-IntroToJavaScript/2.2.2-Activities/1-Evr-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js)

---
### **JS Exercise 2 (Students)**
> **NOTE**: When creating your variables, think about whether to use `const` or `let`. Is the data something that could change? Or is the value something that doesn't change?
#### More practice with variables and primitives: [2-Stu-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js](2.2.2-Activities\2-Stu-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week2-IntroTojavaScript/2.2-IntroToJavaScript/2.2.2-Activities/2-Stu-JSVariablesAndPrimitives.js)

---
## Template Literals: Using Variables in Strings
Aside from single and double quotation marks, strings can be wrapped in backticks (``).

> **TIP**: The backtick key is located directly under the "Esc" key at the top left of your keyboard.

Wrapping your string in backticks not only allows you to use single and double quotations _inside_ your string, but also allows you to use _variables_ inside your string. 

First, notice the issues that occur when using single or double quotes _within_ a string that is **not** a template literal:

```javascript
Single quotes: '"Hello," I said, "how's the weather?"';
```
```javascript
Double quotes: ""Hello," I said, "how's the weather?";
```
```javascript
Template literal: `"Hello," I said, "how's the weather?"`
```

Introduced in ES6, template literals are also an alternative to "adding" (or **concat**enating) strings and variables together. To use a variable inside a template literal, we 'wrap' the variable inside `${ }`:
```javascript
`"Hello ${name}," I said, "how's the weather?"`
```

When using template literals, instead of printing "name" or "${name}", JS evaluates the variable/expression inside the braces (`{}`) and prints its value in that spot.

---
---

## Primitive Data Types II: Undefined & null
The last two primitive data types we will encounter often are the "empty" data types that represent the absence of data: `undefined` and `null`. 

4. _null_ - If we want to indicate that a variable is "blank" **on purpose**, we _explictly_ assign the variable a value of `null`

5. _undefined_ - Undefined **should never be deliberately assigned**. Undefined is used by JS to indicate the absence of any _assigned_ value. All variables start with a value of  `undefined` until they are assigned a value with the assignment operator (`=`). 

> **NOTE**: When accessing a **defined variable** with _no assigned value_, you will get `undefined`. However, when accessing a **variable that has not been created**, you will get a `ReferenceError` that the variable is _not defined_.

> **NOTE**: The sixth and seventh primitive data types are `BigInt` and `Symbol`. Use of these primitives is rare, and we will not cover them in class.

---
### **JS Exercise 3 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with "empty" primitives and template literals: [3-Evr-JSMorePrimitives.js](2.2.2-Activities\3-Evr-JSMorePrimitives.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week2-IntroTojavaScript/2.2-IntroToJavaScript/2.2.2-Activities/3-Evr-JSMorePrimitives.js)

---
### **JS Exercise 4 (Students)**
#### More practice with primitives and template literals: [4-Stu-JSMorePrimitves.js](2.2.2-Activities\4-Stu-JSMorePrimitives.js)
[Web link to activity](https://github.com/savvy-coders/sc-curriculum/blob/master/Week2-IntroTojavaScript/2.2-IntroToJavaScript/2.2.2-Activities/4-Stu-JSMorePrimitives.js)
