# Array Methods
We've seen Arrays since our first day of complex data types, and we've been using them in a number of different forms since then. We know that they associate data with indices, and we know that Arrays have a length property that comes in handy during loops. What other tricks do Arrays have in store for us?

## `Array.prototype.*` methods

Arrays have associated with them some properties, like `.length`, and methods, like `.push()`, to help us use our collections of data more effectively.

> **NOTE**: The DOM "arrays" we returned with `.querySelectorAll()`, `.getElementsByClassName()`, etc. are really array-like. Almost all of these "official" `Array.prototype` methods will cause a Type Error if you try to call them on a list of elements. 
> 
> _One helpful exception_: you may call `.forEach()` on a list of elements returned from `.querySelectorAll()` (we will cover `.forEach()` in the next lesson)

---
## Adding an item with `.push()` and `.unshift()`
* .**push(_item_)** adds item to end and returns length

* **.unshift(_item_)** adds item to beginning and returns length

```javascript
const arr = [1, 2, 3]
let pushReturn = arr.push(5)
console.log(pushReturn) 
// 4
console.log(arr)
// [1, 2, 3, 5]

let unshiftReturn = arr.unshift(-1)
console.log(unshiftReturn) 
// 5
console.log(arr)
// [-1, 1, 2, 3, 5]
```

---
## Removing an item with `.pop()` and `.shift()`
* **.pop()** removes last item and returns removed item

* **.shift()** removes first item and returns removed item

```javascript
const arr = [6, 7, 8]
let popReturn = arr.pop()
console.log(popReturn)
// 8
console.log(arr)
// [6, 7]

let shiftReturn = arr.shift()
console.log(shiftReturn)
// 6
console.log(arr)
// [7]
```

---
### **Exercise 1 (Students)**
#### Practice adding and removing single items: [1-Stu-PopPushShiftUnshift.js](5.2-Activities\1-Stu-PopPushShiftUnshift.js)
---
---
## Finding the location of an item with `.indexOf()` and `.lastIndexOf()`
* **.indexOf(_item_)** returns that item's first index in the array

* **.lastIndexOf(_item_)** returns that item's last index in the array

> **NOTE**: Passing in a value that is not in the array will return `-1`

```javascript
const arr = ["a", "b", "a", ["a", "b", "b", "c"], "c", "c"]
console.log(arr.indexOf("c"))
// 4
console.log(arr.lastIndexOf("a"))
// 2
```

---
## Targeting pieces of an array with `.slice()` and `.splice()`
* **.slice(_start_, _end_)** copies a portion of the array from the _starting index_ to the _**end - 1** index_. The original array is not altered. 
    * If you pass just one argument into `slice`, it will return an array from the specified starting index to the last item in the array. `slice(2)` will return an array with all but the first two elements. 
    * Negative numbers passed into `slice` count from the back of the array, such that `slice(-1)` returns an array with the last item in the array and `slice(-3, -2)` returns an array with the third-last item in the array.

* **.splice(_start_, _# to remove_, _item to add_, ...)** directly mutates/alters the array by removing or replacing items _in place_. 
    * Passing one argument into `splice` functions similar to _`slice`_, returning an array from the specified starting index to the last item in the array - remember, unlike `slice`, `splice` mutates the existing array. So `splice(-2)` removes and returns the last two items in the array.
    * Passing just two arguments into `splice` will remove items only. Beginning at the starting index specified in the first argument, `splice` will remove the number of items specified by the second argument - `splice(2, 2)` starts at the third item (index 2) and removes and returns the items from index 2 and 3.
    * Any arguments passed into `splice` after the first two are added to the array at the specified starting index, _replacing_ any removed items. For example, `splice(2, 1, "x", "y")` starts at the third item, removes it, adds "x" at index 2, then adds "y" at index 3. 

```javascript
const arr = ["Jan", "Feb", "Apr", "Mar", "May", "Sept", "Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
console.log(arr.slice(6, arr.length))
// ["Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
console.log(arr.slice(-3))
// ["Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
console.log(arr.slice(6))
// ["Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
console.log(arr.slice(0, 1))
// ["Jan"]

const april = arr.splice(2, 1)
console.log(april)
// ["Apr"]
console.log(arr)
// ["Jan", "Feb", "Mar", "May", "Sept", "Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
arr.splice(3, 0, april[0])
arr.splice(5, 0, "Jun", "Jul", "Aug")
console.log(arr)
// ["Jan", "Feb", "Mar", "Apr", "May", "Jun", "Jul", "Aug", "Sept", "Oct", "Nov", "Dec"]
```

---
### **Exercise 2 (Everyone)**
#### Practice with locating, slice, and splice: [2-Evr-LocatingSliceSplice.js](5.2-Activities\2-Evr-LocatingSliceSplice.js)
---
---
## Combining arrays: `.concat()` vs. `.join()`
* **.concat(_arr_)** merges two (or more) arrays into a new array with the contents of both. To merge more than two arrays, simply pass more than one array into `concat` as additional arguments. `concat` does not alter/mutate the array it is called on. 

* **.join(_separator_)** returns a single string with the _separator_ between each item in the array. The array `join` is called on is not mutated.

```javascript
const arrOne = [1, 2, 3]
const arrTwo = ["a", "b", "c"]

const arrThree = arrOne.concat(arrTwo)
console.log(arrOne)
// [1, 2, 3]
console.log(arrThree)
// [1, 2, 3, "a", "b", "c"]
console.log(arrTwo.join(" & "))
// "a & b & c"
console.log(arrTwo)
// ["a", "b", "c"]
```
---
### **Exercise 3 (Everyone)**
#### Practice combining arrays: [3-Evr-Concat&Join.js](5.2-Activities\3-Evr-Concat&Join.js)
---
---