# Connecting the SPA to the REST API

At this point we have a working SPA and REST API server running disconnected.   It is time to connect them up so that the SPA can use the data stored in the MongoDB database.

## Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS

Let's add a CORS middleware to the `server/index.js` that adds the necessary headers and allows any origin to access our server.   This isn't advised for a production application and violated every security measure so don't do this in a real enterprise application.

Right below where the logging middleware is defined add the CORS middleware

```
// CORS Middleware
const cors = (req, res, next) => {
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Headers",
    "X-Requested-With,content-type, Accept,Authorization,Origin"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Methods",
    "GET, POST, OPTIONS, PUT, PATCH, DELETE"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Credentials", true);
  next();
};
```

Now we need to use the CORS middleware for it to be functional.   Let's add the use statement next the the `app.use(logging);` statement.

```
app.use(cors);
```

## Add a Pizzas! view to the SPA that consumes the API

We are now ready to create a view in the SPA the fetches the list of pizzas from the API via Axios and displays them.

### Create the view and update the `components/views/index.js` file

We need to create a view template file in the `components/views` folder named `Pizza.js` and add the template which will display the list in an HTML table.

```
export default st => `
<table id="pizzas">
<tr><th>Crust</th><th>Cheese</th><th>Sauce</th><th>Toppings</th></tr>
${st.pizzas
  .map(pizza => {
    return `<tr><td>${pizza.crust}</td><td>${pizza.cheese}</td><td>${
      pizza.sauce
    }</td><td>${pizza.toppings.join(" & ")}</td></tr>`;
  })
  .join("")}
</table>
`;
```

Next we need to add the `Pizza` file to the `components/views/index.js` file so that the view can be retrieved successfully by the SPA.

```
export { default as Pizza } from "./Pizza";
```

And let's make it looks better by adding some styles to the `styles.css` file right below the `#gallery img` CSS block.

```
#pizzas {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  font-size: 1.2em;
  height: auto;
  width: 92.5%;
  margin: auto;
}

#pizzas tbody {
  width: 100%;
}

#pizzas th {
  text-align: left;
}

#pizzas td,th {
  width: 25%;
}
```

Our view is now complete but there is no data to display the view so let's add the Pizza store.

### Create the Pizza store and update the `store/index.js` file

We need to create a store file in the `store` folder named `Pizza.js` and add the JSON object that the SPA expects to be able to display the view.

```
export default {
  header: "List of Pizzas",
  view: "Pizza",
  pizzas: []
};
```

Let's take notes that pizzas is initialized as an empty error to reduce the likelihood of and error being produced due to the value being undefined.

Next we need to add the `Pizza` file to the `store/index.js` file so that the view can be retrieved successfully by the SPA.

```
export { default as Pizza } from "./Pizza";
```

### Update the navigation to include Pizza!

As previously discussed we need to update the `store/Links.js` file to include the Pizza! link in the header menu by adding the following to the end of the array.

```
{ title: "Pizza", text: "Pizza!" }
```

Don't forget to add a comma to the previous object in the array.

### Update the SPA `index.js` file to retrieve the Pizza list.

Since we are going to be using Axios to make our HTTP requests, we need to install it.

```
npm install axios
```

We need to import Axios so that we can reference it.  At the top of the file with the other imports add Axios.

```
import axios from "axios";
```

Now that we have Axios we need to put it to use.   At the bottom of the `index.js` file let's add the `fetchDataByView` function to execute the HTTP request and inject the data into the store.

```
function fetchDataByView(st = state.Home) {
  switch (st.view) {
    case "Pizza":
      axios
        .get("http://localhost:4040/pizzas")
        .then(response => {
          state[st.view].pizzas = response.data;
        })
        .catch(error => {
          console.log("It puked", error);
        });
      break;
  }
}
```

We are only configuring the Pizza view at this point but using the switch allows for future views to be added and only retrieve the data only when the data is needed.

The final step is to call our  `fetchDataByView` function at the bottom of the `render` function passing in `st` which represents the state.

```
fetchDataByView(st);
```

Test out the new Pizza! view.
