# Hosting the Backend: Heroku

## Heroku Deployment

So far, all of our work has been done _locally_. This is common for development, but not very useful for APIs that we want to share with others. You'll recall that our single-page app has both a local and a public version (called "production") which both track the `master` branch of your project's `git` repository.

We used Netlify to deploy the public version of our single-page-app, but Netlify is built to serve primarily static content (like HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files) in what's called a "serverless" environment. Serverless environments do not support the kind of long-running services that we've just written; as you might expect, it's difficult to deploy a "server" to a platform that is explicitly "serverless"\*.

To host our `express` server, we'll use a another platform for deploying `git`-based long-running processes called [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/). Heroku also has the benefit of a Postgres plugin that will make it easier to use a relational database for our blog posts.

Let's walk through deploying our API to Heroku so that we can share our blog posts with the world!

<br>

---

<br>

### Activity 3: Deploying to Heroku

1. Make sure that you've signed up for a free Heroku account first! This will require email confirmation.

2. On the home page once you've logged in, click the `Create a new app` button. And choose a new app name.

3. Once you've chosen a name, pick the GitHub deployment method on the next screen. Just like Netlify, you should be able to search through a list of your repositories for automatic deployment. Select your SPA project, then click `Enable Automatic Deploys`.

4. Heroku looks for a `start` script in your `package.json` to decide how to run your `express` server. So in your `package.json`, add the following to your `scripts`:

   ```bash
   "start": "node ./server/index.js"
   ```

5. Once you stage and commit those changes, you should be able to watch the deployment process happen from the Overview dashboard before clicking the Open App button to see your API in action.

6. To see your request logs in real time, you can visit `https://dashboard.heroku.com/apps/YOUR-APP-NAME/logs`

<br>

---

<br>
