# SPA Extras

## **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Asynchronous Functions and APIs -- Working with Time
- JavaScript Promises
- AJAX techniques and ReSTful JSON APIs
- JavaScript Fetch API
- JavaScript Axios library
- API Authorization with Query Params
- OpenWeatherMap and GitHub API's
- Securing environmental variables with dotenv

<br>

---

<br>

## Asynchronous Functions and APIs -- Working with Time

One of the hallmarks of an interactive application is that we, as developers, have a fluid interaction with time.

Events can happen at any time, in any order, and it's up to us to "listen" to and "handle" any event _whenever_ they end up happening.

Our SPA renders our app, waits/listens for a user event, then renders our app again based on the event, and so on...

Up to this point, though, we've been operating under the assumption that the only "delays" that might occur came from _users_, rather than from within _our own application processes_.

**But, what happens when we aren't sure how long it'll take for our code to execute?**

<br>

> **NOTE**: Remember, `setTimeout()` takes two arguments, a callback function that is executed after the timeout/delay, and a delay (in milliseconds): `setTimeout(() => {}, delay)`

Think about the following:

```javascript
function randomFinish(label) {
  const randomTime = Math.random() * 1000;

  setTimeout(() => console.log(label + "is done!"), randomTime);
}

randomFinish("function 1");
randomFinish("function 2");
randomFinish("function 3");
```

There's no guarantee that the `function`s would finish in order! The functions are not _synchronized_/ordered in time. **They are _asynchronous_**. When `function 1` sets a delay with `setTimeout`, JS does not wait around for that pause to finish before executing more lines of code/functions.

<br>

---

<br>

### **Activity 1: asynchronous functions example**

1. In your terminal, navigate to `Activities/7.2-Activities` in the curriculum
2. Using `node`, run `randomFinish.js` in your terminal - `node randomFinish.js`
3. Run `randomFinish.js` a few more times. Notice that each time we run the file, the functions finish in a random order.

How could we handle a situation where we **always** wanted `function 1` to fire before `function 2`, before `function 3`, even when we don't know how long it will take for each function to finish?

<br>

---

<br>

## JavaScript Promises

One way we can control the flow of asynchronous functions is with the `Promise` constructor Object/class.

**Promises are like IOUs:** You can create an IOU, specify how you'd like to handle whatever comes back from the IOU, and then the IOU can resolve in some way later on (either, "here's what you're owed" or "sorry, you get nothing").

A `Promise` is created with the `new` keyword, and is given a callback function that is passed two parameters: a `resolve` function and a `reject` function, which handle the two possible outcomes of a `Promise`.

These two options can then be handled using the `.then` or `.catch` methods of the newly-constructed Promise.

That's a lot to take in, so let's see what our example above might look like with Promises:

```javascript
function handleFinish(count, resolve) {
  const label = `function ${count}`;

  console.log(`${label} is done!`);

  resolve(count + 1);
  // resolves the Promise that was constructed in randomFinish,
  // to be handled with .then()
}

function randomFinish(count) {
  const randomTime = Math.random() * 1000;

  return new Promise((resolve) => {
    // the Promise constructor takes one argument: the function below
    // resolve is a function, too! reject is unused in this example
    setTimeout(() => handleFinish(count, resolve), randomTime);
  });
}

randomFinish(1)
  .then(randomFinish)
  .then(randomFinish);
```

Wow! Check out that final syntax... by returning `Promises`, each iteration of `randomFinish` can be chained together using the `.then` method.

Not only is that clear and easy to read, but the important functions are all grouped together to make the whole application's flow easier to understand.

_However_, as we can see, constructing our own Promises is fairly complicated and difficult to read. Surely, there is an easier way to handle asynchronous JS... (there are at least two!)

<br>

---

<br>

### **Activity 2: promises example**

1. In your terminal, while still in `Activities/7.2-Activities`, use `node` to run `promises.js`
2. Run `promises.js` a few more times, notice that it always runs "in order".

<br>

---

<br>

## AJAX web development techniques

So JavaScript Promises are neat, but when do we use this "in the real world"? Sure, there could be some UI interactions that require a `setTimeout`-driven delay, but those are rare. Instead, the `Promise` _structure_ and _syntax_ are used primarily for those functions that are meant to **fetch data asynchronously**.

**A**synchronous **J**avaScript **A**nd **X**ML (**AJAX**) is how most JS applications interact with _data_: pulling information that can be handled by JavaScript from an **A**pplication **P**rogramming **I**nterface (**API**).

<br>

## ReSTful JSON APIs

The most common type of API you'll interact with as a web developer is a **ReSTful** (**Re**sponsive **S**tate **T**ransfer) **JSON API**.

This kind of API leverages the HTTP verbs that we've seen before in our work with forms \(e.g. `GET`, `POST`, etc.\), but uses a JavaScript-compatible data format instead of URL-encoded data.

To make more sense of this idea, let's take a look at an example API that's set up for us to make AJAX requests.

<br>

---

<br>

### **Activity 3: examine a RESTful API in the browser**

1. Navigate to [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/) and take a look at the documentation on that page.
2. Now to go [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts). What comes back?
3. Instead of returning HTML, this URL returns plain text formatted according to JavaScript standards. This kind of URL is called a "route" or an "endpoint", and it's returning data in JSON \("JavaScript Object Notation"\) format. What are the data types you see here?
4. What happens when you go to [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1) or [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/2](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/2)? The number at the end represents the `id` of the post returned. What are some benefits to constructing routes this way?

<br>

---

<br>

## JavaScript `fetch` API

If we're going to use data from an API like this one, we have to accept that there are going to be some _delays_ and _uncertainties_ regarding the acquisition of this data. There will be:

- time spent sending the request
- time spent retrieving the information
- time spent parsing the information
- possibility of failure throughout the entire operation.

Luckily, most **browsers** have implemented at least a part of the new [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) for retrieving data asynchronously using Promises.

Let's try it out with JSON placeholder!

<br>

> **NOTE**: When we `fetch` data from an API, we must first "unwrap" or parse the initial response into JSON. With the data formatted correctly, we can then use the JSON response as a JS Object.
>
> ```javascript
> // fetching our data from an API
> fetch("url-to-API-endpoint")
>   // parsing our response into JSON format
>   .then((response) => response.json())
>   // "using" the formatted response in our script
>   .then((json) => console.log(json));
> ```

<br>

---

<br>

### **Activity 4: `fetch`ing data from an API**

1. From `Activities/7.2-Activities`, try running `fetchAPI.js` with `node`. We get a reference error that says `fetch` is not defined. We get this error because `fetch` only works _in the browser_
2. Instead, still in `Activities/7.2-Activities`, locally serve the `index.html` file with `live-server .`
3. Notice that `index.js` is linked to the same `fetchAPI.js` we ran with `node`.
4. Open the console to examine the results of our API request. Our data is output as a fully-parsed (ready-to-use) JS Object

`fetch` works quite well for very basic `GET` requests, but it can be tough to work with for more complex AJAX operations. There are also slight deviations between browser implementations, which can lead to some frustrating and hard-to-track-down bugs in the future.

Luckily, we have third-party libraries to help us out!

<br>

---

<br>

## JavaScript `axios` library

The library that we'll use for the remainder of the course is called [axios](https://github.com/axios/axios). It's like `fetch`, but works in _and_ out of the browser, has a number of more sensible defaults that are missing from `fetch`, and is just a bit more convenient for complex requests.

Let's try using `axios` to fetch some blog posts for our `Blog` page!

`axios` is a third-party library, so we'll need to include it as a dependency through `npm`:

```node
npm install --save axios
```

Let's re-write our `fetch` API request from the previous activity with `axios`. You'll notice that it looks pretty similar, but doesn't require `fetch`'s unwrapping/JSON parsing step:

```javascript
axios
  .get("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts")
  .then((response) => console.log(response.data));
```

<br>

---

<br>

### **Activity 5: fetching data with `axios` for our SPA**

We're going to be building a new "Blog" page/view using the JSON placeholder API we have been using.

1. Let's start by creating a new piece of state: Blog. In `store`, create a new file - `Blog.js`
2. Inside `store/Blog.js`, export an object with `header`, `view`, and `posts` keys.

   ```javascript
   // in store/Blog.js
   export default {
     header: "My Blog",
     view: "Blog",
     posts: [],
   };
   ```

3. Don't forget to import/export `Blog` from `store/index.js`! If we don't, we won't have access to our new Blog piece of state.

   ```javascript
   export { default as Blog } from "./Blog";
   ```

4. In our "root" `index.js`, import `axios` from our node modules (like we imported `navigo` or `lodash`)

   ```javascript
   import axios from "axios";
   ```

5. After importing axios, we will use it to get our blog data and save each of the posts in in state.

   ```javascript
   // get data from an API endpoint
   axios
     .get("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts")
     // handle the response from the API
     .then((response) => {
       // for each post in the response Array,
       response.data.forEach((post) => {
         // add it to state.Blog.posts
         state.Blog.posts.push(post);
       });
     });
   ```

6. Now we have all of our blog post data stored in state, but we don't currently have a Blog view to display the information. We need the `views/Blog.js` functional component. Let's start by creating a `Blog.js` file inside our `views` folder.
7. Inside our `views/Blog.js`, we need to export by default a function that takes in a piece of state and returns a template literal of HTML.

   ```javascript
   export default (st) => `
   <section id="blog">
   </section>`;
   ```

8. Now we need to construct or blog post HTML inside our `<section>` tag. We want to `map` over our blog posts, format them as HTML inside a template literal, then `join` all the posts into a single string.

   ```javascript
   // inside the blank line, we format each post into HTML
   export default (st) => `
   <section id="blog">
   ${st.posts.map((post) => {}).join()}
   </section>`;
   ```

9. Our HTML for each blog post might be fairly complex. We _could_ do all the complex formatting inside our template literal, but a better solution is to create a function that formats a single post. Then we can simply use that function inside our template literal, creating much cleaner code.

   ```javascript
   function formatBlogPost(post) {
     return `
     <div class="blog-post">
       <h4>${post.title} by User ${post.userId}</h4>
       <p>${post.body}</p>
     </div>`;
   }
   ```

   ```javascript
   export default (st) => `
   <section id="blog">
   ${st.posts
     .map((post) => {
       formatBlogPost(post);
     })
     .join()}
   </section>`;
   ```

10. Don't forget to import/export `Blog` from our `views/index.js` aggregator!

    ```javascript
    export { default as Blog } from "./Blog";
    ```

11. Next, we need to add "Blog" to the exported Array from `store/Links.js` so that our Blog page appears in our nav bar.
12. Our page is _pretty good_ right now. If the project is currently loaded, it will sometimes return the blog posts as intended. This is known as a **race condition**. By definition, a race condition occurs when actions set up by a developer do not occur in the order as intended. In this case the program attempted to format the data before collecting the information from the API. So let's explore a way to make sure this doesn't happen again.

We can use the router functionality already in place and add to it a method called hooks. What this does is tell the program the order in which to complete the process and **only in this order**.


```javascript
router.hooks({
  before: (done, params) => {
    const page = params && params.hasOwnProperty("page") ? capitalize(params.page) : "Home";

    if (page === "Blog") {
      state.Blog.posts = [];
      axios.get("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts").then(response => {
        response.data.forEach(post => {
          state.Blog.posts.push(post);
          done();
        });
      });
    }
  }
})
```

<br>

---

<br>

## API Authorization

There are many open APIs, but most of them are not _quite_ as open as the placeholder JSON data API that we worked with earlier.

While computing power is cheap, it's not _free_, and most APIs require at least a little bit of hoop-jumping to get to their data.

<br>

### **Query Params**

In a RESTful API, a resource is usually accessed by name at a unique route, e.g. `https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com`**`/posts`** vs `https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com`**`/users`**.

We know that these are going to be different "things", so they get different endpoints. But what about when we want to add some extra data to our "query" of this resource?

One common pattern is to use a **query param**. You can see a _query param_ in action when you perform a Google search. If you search for "Adorable Puppies", your results page probably has a URL of something like `https://google.com/?q=Adorable+Puppies` (plus some other query params with info about you). Everything after the `?` represents a bit of extra information about your search!

Let's see how `openweathermap.org` uses query params to protect and refine responses from their weather API.

<br>

### **Order matters in the root index.js file. Here's a guide:**

1. Import statements

Import statements should always be at the top of your index.js file. These tell the the code page what files and packages will be used. Without them being labeled at the top of the file, the code page will not know how to use all of this data.

2. Declaring router

Router is used to map all of the code logic to the location. Without this line of code your project will not be able to appropriately load the necessary data.

3. Render function

The render function tells your project to compile all of the files inside the components folder. In addition, the router function is called inside this function block to update the page links. The final piece inside this function block is a function for the Navigation Menu.

4. Event Handler function

This function should identify an event then give instructions. This will use the render function to upload the necessary page in the navigation menu

5. Router.hooks

This function holds instructions for updating information from an API. An if statement is given for a certain view (from the views folder) followed by an axios.get statement. This is then followed by an axios.then statement in which directions are given about which pieces of this data to collect.

6. Router.on

This is the function that executes the axios statements. This will only run correctly if given instructions on what to execute. It is for this reason that this function must follow the instructions laid out in the router.hooks function.

<br>

### **OpenWeatherMap**

OpenWeatherMap is a service that includes a free-to-use API that can give you information about weather conditions anywhere around the world.

This is pretty powerful for developers, but the maintainers of this API need some way of making sure that users don't abuse this system or bring down the API by making too many requests at once!

To manage traffic, OpenWeatherMap uses something called an **API key**. This is a unique identifier that allows `api.openweathermap.org` to restrict its responses to users with an account and to stop responding if users send too many requests in a short amount of time.

1. First, register for an API key at [`openweathermap.org`](https://openweathermap.org/appid#get). Hopefully you did this before class, because it takes a couple hours for the API key to activate!
2. Let's try to visit the API without a key. Go to [`https://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather`](https://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather) in your browser. What's the response?
3. Try again, but this time use an `APPID` _query param_ to access the restricted endpoint (i.e. `https://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?APPID=$YOUR_API_KEY`). What's the response now?
4. We're getting access to the API, but we aren't quite making a correct request. Let's examine the [API documentation for current weather](https://openweathermap.org/current).
5. Not only do we need to provide our API key as a query param, but also we need to specify a city (and chain our query params with `&`)

   ```
   api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?q={city name}&appid={your api key}
   ```

   Let's add St. Louis as a query param:

   ```
   api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?q=st louis&appid={your api key}
   ```

6. That's more like it! How can we store this in state? We first use `axios` to get the data from our API endpoint, then we can use that data to populate a new piece of state. In our example, we are creating a new key (`weather`) in `state.Home` that holds some weather data as an Object.

Just as was done with the Blog posts, it is important to make sure that the information is collected from the API before formatting it. Add this information to the hooks method

```javascript
router.hooks({
  before: (done, params) => {
    const page = params && params.hasOwnProperty("page") ? capitalize(params.page) : "Home";

    if (page === "Blog") {
      state.Blog.posts = [];
      axios.get("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts").then(response => {
        response.data.forEach(post => {
          state.Blog.posts.push(post);
          done();
        });
      });
    }

    if (page === "Home") {
      axios
        .get(
          `https://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?appid=fbb30b5d6cf8e164ed522e5082b49064&q=st.%20louis`
        )
        .then(response => {
          state.Home.weather = {};
          state.Home.weather.city = response.data.name;
          state.Home.weather.temp = response.data.main.temp;
          state.Home.weather.feelsLike = response.data.main.feels_like;
          state.Home.weather.description = response.data.weather[0].main;
          done();
        })
        .catch(err => console.log(err));
    }
  }
});
```

7. Go to 'views/Home.js' and import this infornation so it is displayed on your HomePage.

```javascript
const kelvinToFahrenheit = kelvinTemp =>
  Math.round((kelvinTemp - 273.15) * (9 / 5) + 32);

Weather in ${st.weather.city} ${kelvinToFahrenheit(st.weather.temp)}F, feels
    like ${kelvinToFahrenheit(st.weather.feelsLike)}F
```

<br>

### **GitHub API**

The [GitHub API](https://developer.github.com/v3/) uses an [`Authorization`](https://developer.github.com/v3/) header to restrict access to much of its API. We can implement **custom headers** in our application with `axios` through a _second parameter_ given to to `get`. Let's give it a whirl!

First, let's sign up for a GitHub personal token. We'll use this token as an API key through the `Authorization` header.

1. Go to Settings by clicking your profile image in the top right corner and selecting "Settings"
2. In Settings, select "Developer Settings" at the bottom of the list of categories.
3. Select "Personal Access Tokens", then click the "Generate new token" button.
4. Enter your password to pass to the next screen.
5. Enter a note about what the token is for ("API practice", for example), select the "repo" scope, and click the "Generate token" button at the bottom of the page.
6. Copy your token, then paste it in a new file called `GHtoken`

   > **NOTE**: this `GHtoken` file is meant as a temporary storage spot. Don't commit this file to GitHub! If you need to make commits before migrating your token to a more secure place, either add this file to your `.gitignore`, or avoid adding the file to any commits).

   You won't be able to see or copy your token once you navigate away from the page!

7. Now that we have our token, we can make an API request with a custom header. Let's query our GitHub account for information about your public repositories with the following syntax:

   ```javascript
   axios
     .get(`https://api.github.com/users/${YOUR_GITHUB_USERNAME}/repos`, {
       headers: {
         Authorization: `token ${YOUR_GH_TOKEN}`,
       },
     })
     .then((response) => console.log(response.data));
   ```

   In our `get` method, the first parameter is the API endpoint we are querying and the second is an Object that represents our custom header:

   ```javascript
   {
     headers: {
       Authorization: `token ${YOUR_GH_TOKEN}`;
     }
   }
   ```

<br>

### **Securing environmental variables with `dotenv`**

So far, this "security" isn't doing us much good if we still have to hard code our API keys/tokens into our JS (which is then pushed to GitHub for all the world to see...).

Luckily, we have a third-party module that can create hidden **environment variables**: [`dotenv`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv).

1. Install `dotenv`

   ```
   npm install dotenv
   ```

2. Create a `.env` file in the root directory and add our GitHub token to a line (we can delete our `GHtoken` file now too):

   ```
   GITHUB_USERNAME=<your GitHub username here>
   GITHUB_TOKEN=<your GitHub token here>
   SOME_API_KEY=<some API key>
   ```

   Each line `.env` is for a new variable, and we don't separate our variables with commas or semi-colons. Also, because these are fixed, "hard" variables, we use upper case and snake case (i.e. UPPER_AND_SNAKE_CASE).
3. We never want to give GitHub access to our `.env` file, so we need to add `.env` to our `.gitignore`.
4. Next, let's create a `env.js` file in our root directory. In this file, we `import dotenv` and call the `config()` method which reads the `.env` file, parses it, and assigns it to `process.env`.

   ```javascript
   import dotenv from "dotenv";

   dotenv.config();
   ```

5. To access our environment variables in a JS file, we need to `import` our `env.js` file. Then we can access our environment variables from the `process.env` Object.

   ```javascript
   import "./env";

   axios
     .get(`https://api.github.com/users/${process.env.GITHUB_USERNAME}/repos`, {
       headers: {
         Authorization: `token ${process.env.GITHUB_TOKEN}`,
       },
     })
     .then((response) => console.log(response.data));
   ```

<br>

Read about [Google API key best practices](https://developers.google.com/maps/api-key-best-practices) for more on safeguarding private information.

<br>

---

<br>

### **Summary: -**

In this module we learned about ...

- Asynchronous Functions and APIs -- Working with Time
- JavaScript Promises
- AJAX techniques and 2 ReSTful JSON APIs
  - The JavaScript Fetch API and how when we use fetch, we must parse the initial response into JSON
  - The JavaScript Axios library looks like `fetch', but has more options and doesn't require JSON parsing
- API Authorization with Query Params -- where everything after the `?` represents params with extra information
- Using the OpenWeatherMap and GitHub API's
- Securing environmental variables like API keys with `dotenv`
