# In-depth Unit Testing

### **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Unit Testing
- Reasons Why Unit Testing Matters
- Understanding Jasmine
- What is Test-Driven Development(TDD)

<br>

---

<br>

## Unit Testing

Unit testing is a type of testing which is found at the bottom of the software testing pyramid. It involves breaking the codebase down into smaller parts (or units) and testing those in isolation.

<br>

---

<br>

## Reasons Why Unit Testing Matters

1. They save you hours of debugging.
When you have tests that your code needs to pass, you’re preventing bugs .

You’ll catch all of those little things, like syntax errors or the wrong values getting passed, that sometimes make it to the next phase in your pipeline. After you’ve written a bunch of code for an application, it will take you longer to find those small things compared to finding them immediately with your unit tests.


2. They make you think about your code before/as you write it.

Since you have to write each unit test, you really have to understand what the functionality is supposed to do.

3. They make you write efficient code the first time.

Writing unit tests helps to keep your code simple because you write just enough code to pass the test. Having simple, easy to read, bug-resistant code in your first round of programming makes you more confident as a developer, and it makes your employers have more confidence in you.

4. They give you documentation for the application.

A unit test is a small piece of code that describes a user story or some kind of requirement. Over time, all of those small pieces of code add up to tell the story of how the entire application works.

<br>

---

<br>

## Understanding Jasmine
In order to unit test our code, we should use a testing framework such as Jasmine.

 Jasmine is a Behavior-Driven Development(BDD) framework for testing JavaScript code.

 BDD is a testing approach derived from the test-Driven Development(TDD).

 In BDD you write tests before writing actual code.

To learn more about TDD click the link below:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development 

 Create Project

 1. instalation

 From root project directory run

 $ npm install --save-dev jasmine

 2. Initializing

 To initialize a project for Jasmine from root project directory run

 $ jasmine init

 This will generate a support/jasmine.json within spec that lets Jasmine know where to look for tests.

 3. Add this to your package.json

 "scripts": {
        "test": "./node_modules/.bin/jasmine-node spec"
      },

### **Activity 1: Write First Unit test**

A project using Jasmine has several components. Here's the project structure:

1. helloWord.js contains the helloWord function, which must be exported for use in other files.
2. Spec folder contain helloWord.spec.js which contains the tests for the function helloWord.
3. Support folder which contain jasmine.js

Now let run tests by simply running jasmine in the command line.

$ jasmine

The test will run in the terminal. The test should fail because it can't find the code for helloWorld().

We need first to right our code and let’s export the code so we can use it in the test file.

```js
let helloWorld = function(){
    return 'Hello World';
  }
  module.exports = helloWorld;
```

Now, go back to the spec file and tell Jasmine where to look for the code. In helloWorld.spec.js require helloWorld.js. Now run the tests again. They should pass!

```js
const assert = require('assert');
const helloWorld = require('../helloWorld.js');

describe("helloWorld()", function() {
    it("it should return Hello World", function(){
      expect(helloWorld()).toEqual('Hello World');
    });
  });
```

The ``describe(string, function)`` function defines what we call a Test Suite, a collection of individual Test Specs.

The ``it(string, function)`` function defines an individual Test Spec, this contains one or more Test Expectations.

The ``expect(actual)`` expression is what we call an Expectation. In conjunction with a Matcher it describes an expected piece of behaviour in the application.

The ``matcher(expected)`` expression is what we call a Matcher. It does a boolean comparison with the expected value passed in vs. the actual value passed to the expect function, if they are false the spec fails.

<br>

---

<br>

### **Summary: -**

In this module we learned how to use Jasmine to unit test your JavaScript code.

-
